AUGUST 19TH TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE REGULAR MEETING
OF THE ANN ARBOR PLANNING
COMMISSION FOR DETAILED
INFORMATION ON MEETING
PROCEDURES PLEASE REVIEW THE
FOUR PRINTED AGENDA WHICH IS
AVAILABLE AT EITHER END OF THE
DYAS WITH PLANNER THATCHER.
>> WOULD YOU PLEASE CALL THE
ROLL?
THANK YOU COMMISSIONER.
WHY ARE YOU HERE COMMISSIONER
ABRAMSON HERE COMMISSIONER
HAMMERSCHMIDT COMMISSIONER LEE
HERE.
COMMISSIONER DESH HERE.
COMMISSIONER MILLS HERE.
COMMISSIONER WHETHER IT BE HERE
COMMISSIONER ATOM'S
COMMISSIONER HERE A QUORUM.
>> THANK YOU PLANNER THATCHER I
AS WE WHAT'S THE PROCEDURE I
WANT TO QUICK CHANGE TO THE
ORDER OF THE AGENDA.
DO WE APPROVE THE AGENDA FIRST
AND THEN MAKE A MOTION TO AMEND
IT OR CAN I CAN WE AMEND AND
THEN APPROVE IT AMENDED AND
THEN APPROVED?
>> OK, I WOULD ENTERTAIN A
MOTION TO MOVE UP ELEVEN WHICH
IS THE PLANNING COMMISSION
BYLAWS AMENDMENT BEFORE
TENNESEE WHICH IS THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE RE
REVIEW.
>> I'D MAKE THAT MOTION MOVED
BY COMMISSIONER ADAMS.
IS THERE A SECOND COMMISSIONER
DISH SECONDS?
IS THERE ANY DISCUSSION
OF COMMISSIONER ABERS?
>> COULD SOMEBODY JUST PROVIDE
A BRIEF EXPLANATION TO THE
RATIONALE?
>> OH SURE.
MY RATIONALE IS I WANTED TO GET
IT OUT OF THE WAY SO THAT THE
REST OF OUR TIME COULD BE SPENT
ON THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND I
MADE THE MOTION BECAUSE I'D
JUST LIKE TO KNOW HOW MH TIME
WE HAVE AT THE END OF THE
MEETING TO CONSIDER THE PLAN SO
THAT THAT'S THE ONLY THING
WE'VE GOT AND KNOWING THE TIME
WILL BE HELPFUL.
>> ANY OTHER DISCUSSION, ALL
THOSE IN FAVOR OF THE MOTION
BUT BY SAYING I OPPOSE THE
MOTION CARRIES SO NOW I HAVE I
DID NOT DO THAT.
IT'S THE MIKE MAY I NOW HAVE A
MOTION TO APPROVE THE AMENDED
AGENDA MOVE BY COMMISSIONER
DISH SECONDED BY COMMISSIONER
ANY DISCUSSION ALL THOSE IN
FAVOR BY SAYING I OPPOSE SAME
SIGN THE MOTION CARRIES.
>> MAY I HAVE A MOTION TO
APPROVE THE MINUTES OF THE
AUGUST 5TH TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
MEETING MOVE BY COMMISSIONER
WHETHER IT BE SECONDED BY
COMMISSIONER, IS THERE ANY
DISCUSSION OF THE MINUTES
SEEING NONE ALL THOSE IN FAVOR
VOTE BY SAYING I ANY OPPOSE THE
MOTION CARRIES NEXT ARE THE
REPORTS TO THE PLANNING
COMMISSION AND WRITTEN
COMMUNICATIONS WILL START IF
COUNCIL MEMBER DISHES READY
WITH COUNCIL NO DISH I AM READY
FOR COUNCIL MET LAST NIGHT FOR
A RECORD THIRTY MINUTES AND
PASSED NOTHING OF INTEREST TO
THE CITY PLANNING COMMISSION.
>> THANK YOU FOR YOUR REPORT
MANAGER REPORT BY PLAN THATCHER
.
>> THANK YOU.
DO ANY OTHER COMMISSIONERS
OFFICERS OR COMMITTEE LIAISONS
HAVE ANY REPORTS THEY LIKE TO
MAKE AT THIS ON WRITTEN
COMMUNICATIONS ARE INCLUDED IN
TODAY'S PACKET AND IT HAS BEEN
UPDATED.
>> NEXT WE MOVE TO AGENDA ITEM
NUMBER SIX THIS IS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR INDIVIDUALS TO
SPEAK UP TO THREE MINUTES ON
ISSUES NOT LISTED AS A PUBLIC
HEARING ON THIS AGENDA.
WE WILL FIRST HEAR FROM THOSE
OF YOU WHO ARE PRESENT IN OUR
CHAMBERS AND THEN WE WILL HEAR
FROM REMOTE PARTICIPANTS TO
SPEAK REMOTELY.
PRESS STAR NINE IF ON PHONE OR
USE THE RACE HAND FEATURE IF ON
ZUM FAIRPHONE ACCESS PLEASE
CALL EIGHT SEVEN SEVEN EIGHT
FIVE THREE FIVE TO FOUR SEVEN
AND ENTER THE MEETING ID NINE
SEVEN SEVEN SIX SIX THREE FOUR
ONE TWO TWO SIX CITY STAFF WILL
IDENTIFY CALLERS BY THE LAST
THREE DIGITS OF THEIR PHONE
NUMBERS OR BY NAME FOR ZOOME
USERS YOU WILL HEAR AN
ANNOUNCEMENT WHEN IT'S YOUR
TURN TO SPEAK PLEASE TRY TO
MOVE TO A QUIET AREA AND MUTE
ANY BACKGROUND NOISE FOR ALL
PARTICIPANTS WHETHER IN THE
CHAMBER OR ON ZUM.
>> PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME AND
YOUR ADDRESS AT THE BEGINNING
OF YOUR COMMENTS.
IS THERE ANYONE PRESENT IN THE
CHAMBERS WHO WOULD LIKE TO
SPEAK AT THIS TIME
?
YOU CAN MAKE YOUR WAY TO THE
PODIUM AND IF SEVERAL OF YOU
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK YOU CAN
FORM A LINE.
TOM BLACKWELL 16 FOR A BROADWAY
REGARDING THE UPCOMING
COMPREHENSIVE YOU PLAY OF LAND
USE PLAN.
MY OPINION IS THAT SETBACKS AND
ARE ESSENTIAL TO MAINTAINING
WALKABILITY AND TREE COVER AND
THE GENERAL ATMOSPHERE AND IT'S
WORTH SAYING SOMETHING ABOUT
SETBACKS IN THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN ITSELF AS WELL AS IN THE
UPCOMING ZONING BYLAW.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS JOHN GODFREY.
I LIVE HERE TO ZERO NINE
BROCKMANN.
GOOD NEWS THE INTERPRETE
COMMUNITY AREA COMMUNITY
FOUNDATION HAS JUST RELEASED
THIS I THINK IS RATHER
EXTRAORDINARY REPORT CALLED THE
WASHTENAW COUNTY HOUSING
STUDY
.
IT'S BEEN PRODUCED BY ONE
OF THE LEADING URBAN PLANNING
FIRMS, UNITED STATES, A FIRM
THAT'S CONSIDERED TO BE STATE
OF THE ART USING DETAILED DATA
ON INCOMES, HOUSING STOCK AND
PRICES.
IT ANALYZES CURRENT MARKET
DYNAMICS FOR FUTURE TRENDS AND
RISKS TO AFFORDABILITY.
THE STUDY COVERS ALL COUNTY
MUNICIPALITIES BUT HIGHLIGHTS
ANN ARBOR AND NEARBY TOWNSHIPS
AS THE HOUSING ENGINE OF THE
COUNTY.
CRUCIALLY, IT RECOGNIZES THE
HOUSING CHALLENGES CAN ONLY BE
SOLVED AT THE COUNTY LEVEL.
THE REPORT OFFERS SOME WELCOME
NEWS FINDING NO COUNTYWIDE
HOUSING CRISIS WITH MOST MOST
HOUSEHOLDS MANAGING IT
PROJECTS.
HOWEVER, ABOUT 15000 NEW
HOUSEHOLDS BY TWENTY FORTY FIVE
THE NATIONAL INSTABILITY COULD
LOWER THAT FIGURE THAT DOESN'T
MEAN WE CAN ALL GO HOME.
SERIOUS PROBLEMS REMAIN.
THE REPORT HIGHLIGHTS MAJOR
GAPS BETWEEN INCOMES AND
AVAILABLE HOUSING.
THE MARKET CAN'T DELIVER
AFFORDABILITY.
NEW HOMES ARE OUT OF REACH FOR
HOUSEHOLDS EARNING UNDER ONE
HUNDRED AND FIFTY THOUSAND
DOLLARS AND QUALITY TWO BEDROOM
RENTALS REQUIRE NEARLY ONE
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS INCOME
ACROSS THE COUNTY AND AABA
WORKS FOR HIGH EARNING DUAL
INCOME COLLEGE EDUCATED
HOUSEHOLDS BUT NOT FOR SINGLE
EARNERS WITHOUT DEGREES WHO
FACE NO PATH UP THE HOUSING
LADDER.
THE CORE ISSUE FACING US IS
AFFORDABILITY.
THE COUNTY LACKS 11000
AFFORDABLE RENTALS AND FOUR
THOUSAND OWNER UNITS RIGHT NOW
PLUS UP TO THE FIFTEEN THOUSAND
NEW HOUSEHOLDS EXPECTED BY
TWENTY FORTY FIVE MORE HOUSING
IS NEEDED BUT THE REPORT SHOWS
THAT BLANKET UP ZONING AND
TRICKLE DOWN MARKET RATE
BUILDING WON'T SOLVE THE
PROBLEM.
TARGETED CHANGES ARE ESSENTIAL.
THIS KIND OF DATA RICH ANALYSIS
IS WHAT ANN ARBOR NEEDED AS
PART OF ITS PLANNING PROCESS.
IS IT TOO LATE?
CERTAINLY NOT.
A RECENT URBAN INSTITUTE STUDY
REACHES THE SAME CONCLUSION THE
US HOUSING SHORTFALL IS REAL
BUT IMBALANCES DIFFER SHARPLY
BY REGION, CITY AND
NEIGHBORHOOD AS WELL AS INCOME
UP ZONING DOESN'T FIX THIS.
IT MOSTLY PRODUCES LUXURY UNITS
AND DISPLACES MODERATE INCOME
HOMES.
EFFECTIVE HOUSING POLICY
REQUIRES SMART PLANNING AND
REGULATION AND THEN AABA
AFFORDABILITY IS A CORE ISSUE.
IN JULY 28 PERCENT OF LISTINGS
ON THE HOUSING MARKET EXCEEDED
ONE MILLION DOLLARS.
YET THE DRAFT PLAN'S TOP DOWN
FREE MARKET UP ZONING LACKS THE
EQUITY FOCUS NEEDED TO PROTECT
VULNERABLE NEIGHBORHOODS FROM
GENTRIFICATION IF THE TRUE GOAL
IS TRUE.
THANK YOU MR. GODFRIED.
NOT JUST TAX.
>> THANK YOU MR. GODFREY.
WE MUST PLAY THANK YOU
ACCORDINGLY.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH, MR. WHITE.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
HELLO MY NAME IS WILL LEAVE.
I LIVE AT FIVE TWENTY EIGHT
NORTH ST. AND I'D LIKE TO
SUGGEST THAT WHEN CATEGORIZING
THESE REMAINING SEVENTEEN
PARCELS THAT THE COMMISSION
PICK WHICHEVER CATEGORY IS MOST
LIKELY TO ACHIEVE THE HIGH
LEVEL GOALS OF THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
>> SO ONE OF THOSE HIGH LEVEL
GOALS IS AFFORDABILITY.
WHICH CATEGORY IS MOST LIKELY
TO CREATE BOTH THE MOST
QUANTITY OF HOUSING AND ALSO
GIVE THE MOST FLEXIBILITY FOR
SMALLER, CHEAPER HOUSING?
I THINK THAT'S A TRANSITION
DISTRICT COMPARED TO
RESIDENTIAL OR NEW RESIDENTIAL
WHICH CATEGORY IS MOST LIKELY
TO CREATE TEN MINUTE
NEIGHBORHOODS WHERE COMMERCIAL
USES ARE ALLOWED IN AREAS WHERE
THERE CURRENTLY ARE NONE?
I THINK ALSO THE TRANSITION
CATEGORY AND WHAT CATEGORY
WOULD BE THE MOST EQUITABLE TO
APPLY GIVEN THAT ARE THREE IN
OUR FOUR PARCELS THROUGHOUT
MOST OF THE REST OF THE CITY
INCLUDING WHERE I LIVE HAVE
BEEN MARKED TRANSITION I THINK
ALSO THE TRANSITION CATEGORY SO
I THINK ALL OF THOSE GOALS ARE
BEST FURTHERED BY TRANSITION.
BUT THERE'S ANOTHER GOAL THAT
CITY COUNCIL HAS ASSERTED A
COUPLE OF TIMES WHICH IS THAT
LOW DENSITY NEIGHBORHOODS ARE
INSULATED FROM TALL BUILDINGS
RIGHT NEAR THEM.
SO WHICH CATEGORY WOULD FURTHER
THIS GOAL?
>> I THINK ALSO TRANSITION
BECAUSE TRANSITION PAPERS DOWN
TO THREE STORIES EXPLICITLY ON
PAGE 116 WHEREAS THIS NEW
RESIDENTIAL CATEGORY HAS NO
LIMIT.
IT JUST HAS MORE THAN THREE
STORIES AND EVEN IF YOU DID PUT
IN A LIMIT AND SAID FIVE OR SIX
STORIES, YOU ARE NOW ALLOWING
FIVE OR SIX STORIES NEXT TO LOW
DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
NEIGHBORHOODS.
>> SO I THINK TRANSITION IS
MUCH MORE OF A WIN WIN.
YOU HAVE MORE BUFFERING BUT YOU
ALSO HAVE MORE OVERALL DENSITY
ALLOWED AND YOU HAVE COMMERCIAL
OPPORTUNITIES SO THAT AREAS
LIKE PONTIAC TRIL WHERE RIGHT
NOW THERE'S A SIXTY ACRE
UNDEVELOPED PARCEL DOESN'T JUST
BECOME EXCLUSIVELY RESIDENTIAL
WHERE RESIDENTS NEED TO DRIVE
FOR EVERY TRIP BUT THEY ALSO
COULD WALK TO STORES AND THAT
WHOLE AREA COULD BE A MORE
WALKABLE AND VIABLE REGION
OF THE CITY.
>> SO I THINK EVERY ONE OF THE
PLAN'S GOALS IS BETTER
FURTHERED FURTHER BY MARKING
THOSE RESIDUAL PARCELS AS
TRANSITION RATHER THAN
RESIDENTIAL OR NEW RESIDENTIAL.
SO THAT'S IN THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
KATHY GRISWOLD WEST ANN ARBOR,
MICHIGAN.
TODAY I RECEIVED A PHONE CALL
FROM I THINK IT WAS NEXT STEPS.
THEY WERE WONDERING IF I WANTED
TO SELL MY HOUSE SO I SAID WELL
,I'M A RETIREE.
I'D CONSIDER IT.
THEY SAID WELL WHAT ARE YOU
LOOKING FOR?
AND I SAID OH, ABOUT ONE POINT
ONE MILLION DOLLARS.
I THOUGHT THAT'LL BE THE END
OF THIS DISCUSSION.
NO WAY.
A FEW MINUTES LATER THE MANAGER
CALLS IT HE WANTS TO TALK TO ME
ABOUT MY HOUSE NOW THIS IS
ABSOLUTELY CRAZY AND I HAVE TO
BELIEVE THESE WERE VENTURE
CAPITALISTS.
THESE THIS WAS NOT SOMEONE
WANTING TO SELL THE HOUSE FOR
THEIR CHILDREN.
SO IN LIGHT OF THAT, I'LL SKIP
RIGHT BACK TO PEDESTRIAN'S
SAFETY I'VE BEEN TALKING ABOUT
THE TWO WAY PSYCHO TRACK ON
MILLER AVENUE WHERE THERE ARE
OVER 90 BLIND SPOTS AND I
THOUGHT MY GOODNESS, IT CAN'T
GET ANY WORSE THAN THIS NINETY
BLIND SPOTS BUT THAT'S OK.
>> SO I GO OUT AND LOOK AT THE
NEW CROSSWALKS ON HERE ON WEST
HURON AND JACKSON THREE OF THEM
LOOK PRETTY GOOD.
THEY'VE GOT PEDESTRIAN REFUGE
ISLANDS RFD.
THERE'S BEEN A TICKET PUT IN
BECAUSE CARS ARE NOT STOPPING
EVEN WHEN THE LIGHTS ARE
FLASHING.
BUT THEN I GO FURTHER EAST AND
THERE IS ANOTHER NEW CROSSWALK
RFD.
EVERYTHING LOOKS GOOD UNTIL I
REALIZE IT IS FOR NARROW LANES
OF TRAFFIC WITH NO REFUGE I
WENT NOW PEOPLE SEEM REALLY
CONFUSED IN ANN ARBOR BECAUSE
WE HAVE A LOCAL CROSSWALK
ORDINANCE AND PEOPLE THINK CARS
JUST HAVE TO STOP BUT IN FACT
THE CROSS WALK ORDINANCE AND
THE STATE LAW ONLY REQUIRE THAT
DRIVERS ON THE SAME SIDE OF THE
ROAD AS THE PEDESTRIAN HAVE TO
STOP.
WHAT THAT MEANS IS YOU'RE A
PEDESTRIAN AND YOU'RE CAUTIOUS.
YOU WAIT FOR THE CARS TO STOP
ON YOUR SIDE OF THE ROAD AND
THEN YOU WALK TO THE MIDDLE
OF THE ROAD AND THE ORDINANCE
REQUIRES AS YOU'RE APPROACHING
SO CAREFULLY, SO CLOSELY AS TO
BE IN DANGER, THE OTHER CARS
ARE GOING TO STOP.
BUT WHEN IT'S TWO CARS GOING IN
ONE DIRECTION THEY MIGHT NOT
SEE YOU.
THE FACT THAT WE ARE BUILDING
CROSSWALKS WITHOUT A REFUGE
ISLAND IS CRIMINAL.
IT IS A DEATH WISH.
THERE IS NO EXCUSE FOR IT AND I
KNOW WE WANT TO GROW OUR
COMMUNITY.
WE NEED MORE DENSE BUT WE HAVE
GOT TO STOP THIS RECKLESS
RECKLESS BEHAVIOR.
YESTERDAY TWO PEDESTRIANS WERE
HIT IN CROSSWALKS.
RELATIVELY NEW CROSSWALKS WERE
STOLEN SCHOOL ROAD THE OTHER
ONE ON NORTH MAPLE ROAD.
THOSE HAD BEEN ROAD DIETED.
THEY WERE ONLY TWO LANES IN ONE
CASE AND THREE LANES IN THE
OTHER CASE.
CARS ARE NOT STOPPING AND THIS
NEEDS TO BE ADDRESSED.
I KNOW WE'RE GOING TO MOVE
FORWARD WITH A PLAN BUT PLEASE
LOOK AT TRAFFIC.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING.
GOOD EVENING IS COMING FROM THE
KOOCHIE AND I AM A RESIDENT
OF WARD FIVE.
I APPLAUD ALL OF YOUR WORK ON
THE PLAN AND URGE YOU PLEASE TO
KEEP IT AS SIMPLE AND FLEXIBLE
AS POSSIBLE WITH RESPECT TO
HOUSING.
I AM A LONG TIME HOMEOWNER
OF THE CITY WHO WOULD LIKE TO
BE PART OF THE SOLUTION TO OUR
HOUSING COST PROBLEM ONE THAT
IS GROWING EXPONENTIALLY WITH
TARIFFS AND LABOR CRACKDOWNS.
I DID A ROUGH CALCULATION FOR
BOTH AN INTERNAL EDU AND I MADE
SOME ADDITIONS AND AN EXTERNAL
EDU AND EVEN IF I'M ABLE TO
OBTAIN FINANCING IT IS
IMPOSSIBLE TO RENT ANY UNIT AT
A RATE THAT'S AFFORDABLE TO OUR
HOUSEHOLD AT 100 PERCENT
OF AMAI MUCH LESS EIGHTY
PERCENT OR LESS.
BUT THE COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH
SERVICING ALONE PROPERTY TAXES,
INSURANCE ETC. SO I URGE YOU
ALL TO START WITH THIS QUESTION
WHAT WILL IT TAKE TO HELP A
HOMEOWNER LIKE MYSELF AGENT
PLACE IN A NEIGHBORHOOD I LOVE
TO BUILD ADDITIONAL UNITS ON MY
PROPERTY THAT ARE AFFORDABLE
WITHOUT THE NEED FOR SUBSIDY
FOR FAMILIES ESSENTIAL WORKERS
IN OUR CITY.
THINK ABOUT STANDARDS FOR
ESPECIALLY ADDITIONAL UNITS
THAT NEED TO BE MADE MORE
FLEXIBLE SUCH AS RELATED TO
LARGE SIZE NUMBER OF UNITS AND
ESPECIALLY THE OWNERSHIP
OF UNITS.
ALSO I KNOW THIS IS NOT WHAT IS
CURRENTLY UNDER DISCUSSION BUT
LOOK AT ALSO PERMIT FEES AND
OTHER FEES AND BUILDING CODES
AND OTHER RULES THAT ADD TO THE
COSTS WORK.
CAN BUILDING CODES BE RELAXED
WITHOUT AFFECTING SAFETY TO
ENABLE AFFORDABLE CONSTRUCTION?
>> HOW CAN
EXISTING HOMEOWNERS
WHO COMMIT TO MEASURABLE LONG
TERM AFFORDABILITY BE HELPED
WITH SUCH CONSTRUCTION WITHOUT
TRIGGERING HIGHER PROPERTY
TAXES?
REMEMBER SMALLER INFILL PROJECT
ARE TYPICALLY TAKEN UP BY SMALL
SCALE BUILDERS AND DEVELOPERS.
MANY OF WHO LIVE IN OUR
COMMUNITY.
THINK ABOUT HOW THIS PLAN CAN
SUPPORT HOMEOWNERS LIKE MYSELF
WHO ARE WILLING TO COMMIT TO
MEASURABLE LONG TERM AFFORDABLE
HOUSING FOR RENTING OR
OWNERSHIP AND OR OWNERSHIP
THROUGH MEASURES IN THIS PLAN
AND THROUGH OTHER MEASURES AND
MAKE YOUR DECISIONS ACCORDINGLY
.
>> THANK YOU FOR YOUR
ATTENTION.
THANK YOU.
HELLO I'M ANN ARBOR NINETEEN
FIFTEEN AUSTEN AVENUE TONIGHT
YOU HAVE THE TEST MAKING SOME
SIGNIFICANT CHANGES TO THE PLAN
THAT COULD AFFECT ANN ARBOR FOR
YEARS TO COME.
I IMPLORE YOU TO MAKE CHANGES
AND DIG DEEPER TO MAKE EVEN
MORE CHANGES TONIGHT YOU'RE
GOING TO HEAR DON'T COMPLICATE
THE MAP BUT IT IS COMPLICATED.
IT SHOULD BE COMPLICATED.
THE FUTURE OF OUR NEIGHBORHOODS
DEPEND ON SMART STRATEGIC
PLANNING.
NOT EVERY AREA IS THE SAME.
EACH NEIGHBORHOOD HAS DIFFERENT
CHARACTERISTICS AND NEEDS.
THERE SHOULD NOT BE A ONE SIZE
FITS ALL FOR ZONING.
YOU ARE ALSO GOING TO HEAR
HOUSING ABUNDANCE NOW BUT WE
DON'T NEED HOUSING ABUNDANCE.
WE NEED AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
THE ANN ARBOR AREA COMMUNITY
FOUNDATION JUST COMPLETED A
REPORT THAT STATES WE DO NOT
HAVE A HOUSING CRISIS.
WHAT WE NEED IS AFFORDABLE
HOUSING ABUNDANCE DOES NOT
EQUAL AFFORDABLE.
YOU'RE GOING TO HEAR MOVE THE
PLAN FORWARD.
WE ARE ALREADY EIGHT MONTHS
BEHIND BUT IN REALITY WE
ALREADY ARE TEN YEARS BEHIND.
WHY DO YOU NEED TO RUSH A PLAN
AND MOVE FORWARD IF IT'S
INADEQUATE?
DOESN'T MAKE SENSE FOR ALL THE
PUBLIC TO KNOW WHAT'S GOING ON
AND BE ABLE TO MAKE
RECOMMENDATIONS?
DOESN'T IT MAKE SENSE TO HAVE A
PLAN THAT IS BASED ON HARD DATA
FACTS AND PUBLIC INPUT RATHER
THAN THE PERSONAL AGENDA
OF NINE UNAPPOINTED
COMMISSIONERS AND A DEVELOPER
DRIVEN MAYOR AND COUNCIL TAKE
YOUR TIME.
WE NEED A THOROUGH PLAN ONE
THAT WILL ACTUALLY MAKE HOUSING
AFFORDABLE A PLAN THAT IS BASED
ON GENTLE DENSITY, NOT
ABUNDANCE.
NOW WE DON'T NEED A FAST PATH
FOR DEVELOPERS TO BUILD
EXPENSIVE AND MARKET RATE
HOUSING THAT WILL ACCELERATE
GENTRIFICATION CAUSE
ENVIRONMENTAL DEVASTATION
OVERRUN OUR WATER AND SEWER
INFRASTRUCTURE IN AND CAUSE
MORE CONGESTION ON OUR ALREADY
DETERIORATING ROADS.
THE CITY NEEDS AN INCLUSIVE
EFFECTIVE PLAN THAT ADDRESSES
THESE CONCERNS, MAKE CHANGES
AND TAKE YOUR TIME ON ANOTHER
NOTE ON JULY 15TH COUNTY
COMMISSIONER DISH I EMAILED YOU
TO SEE THE DISCREPANCY OF WHO
WILL BE PAYING FOR
INFRASTRUCTURE FOR WATER AND
SEWER.
THAT WAS OVER A MONTH AGO.
YOU SAID THE ATTORNEY WOULD GET
BACK WITH AN ANSWER OF WHO WILL
BE PAYING TO UPDATE OUR
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT WE THAT
WILL NEED ACCOMMODATE THE
PEOPLE THAT THE PLAN TENDS TO
BRING TO ANN HARBOR.
IT'S BEEN OVER A MONTH THE
PUBLIC DESERVES AN ANSWER.
WHO IS PAYING THE RATEPAYERS?
THE TAXPAYERS.
THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING.
COMMISSIONERS.
MY NAME'S RALPH NIKIFOR.
MY TOPIC TODAY IS THE ECONOMICS
OF REPLACEMENT OF SINGLE FAMILY
HOMES WITH TRIPLEX IS INQUIRED
PLEXUS.
I STUDIED THIS IN DEPTH WHEN
THE ORIGINAL EIGHT TO ZERO PLAN
IN TWENTY TWENTY INCLUDED
ALLOWING QUAD PLEXUS ON EVERY
LOT AFTER GATHERING INFO FROM
BUILDERS AND LENDERS AND DOING
SOME MATH.
MY CONCLUSION THEN WAS THAT THE
UNITS RESULTING FROM THAT
REPLACEMENT WOULD BE
SIGNIFICANTLY MORE EXPENSIVE
THAN THE HOUSE THEY REPLACED.
I SENT THOSE CALCULATIONS AND
RESULTS TO MRS. STULTZ AND
COUNCIL LATER THAN A TWO ZERO
PLAN WAS REVISED TO TAKE THE
QUAD LAKESIDE OUT ALONG WITH
THE REFERENCE TO AFFORDABILITY
,HOUSE PRICES AND CONSTRUCTION
COSTS ARE SIMILAR INTEREST
RATES.
I HAVE NO REASON TO BELIEVE
THAT THE OVERALL RESULT WILL BE
DIFFERENT NOW AND TRIPLICATES
UNITS ARE MORE EXPENSIVE THAN
QUAD'S BECAUSE THE LINK IS ONLY
SPLIT THREE WAYS.
SO I THINK WE NEED TO FACE THE
REALITY THAT REPLACING HOUSES
WITH TRIPLEX IS IS A TRADE OFF
MORE UNITS BUT HIGHER PRICES IN
THE HOUSE THEY REPLACED SAY
FIVE FIFTY TO SIX HUNDRED AND
UP VERSUS A FOUR HUNDRED
THOUSAND HOUSE IN MY RECENT
DISCUSSION WITH COUNCIL MEMBER.
YES, I THINK WE AGREE ON THAT
POINT.
UNFORTUNATELY I THINK MANY
FOLKS IN TOWN ARE PROMOTING THE
OPPOSITE VIEW THAT THE TRIPLE
EXES WOULD BE THE SAME PRICE OR
LOWER WITHOUT DISCLOSING
CLOSING THE BASIS FOR THAT
BELIEF.
WE HAVE PEOPLE SAYING THEY
COULD BE FOUR HUNDRED AND THEN
YOU PRESS AND IT TURNS OUT WELL
THAT'S IF THERE IS VACANT LOTS
WELL WE DON'T HAVE HARDLY ANY
VACANT LOTS SO YOU SHOULDN'T BE
BASING POLICY ON THAT THEN
SOMEONE POSTED A SEATTLE STUDY
SAYING THAT QUAD FLEX IS
REPLACING HOUSES COULD BE SOLD
FOR THE SAME PRICE.
I LISTEN TO THE PODCAST.
IT TURNS OUT HOUSES THERE COST
EIGHT HUNDRED GRAND SO THE
LANCASTERS IS TWO HUNDRED.
YOU SELL THEM FOR EIGHT HUNDRED
BECAUSE DEMAND FOR THAT THAT'S
A SIX HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLAR
DEVELOPER PROFIT AND COST IF
YOU TAKE THAT AND APPLY IT HERE
YOU GET A HUNDRED THOUSAND
DOLLARS LET'S SAY PER UNIT FOUR
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLAR HOUSE
HUNDRED THOUSAND A UNIT YOU ADD
THAT SIX HUNDRED THAT'S SEVEN
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLAR UNIT
AND AND I'M NOT SUGGESTING THAT
THAT WOULD BE EXACTLY THE SAME
PRICING SEATTLE THAT MIGHT BE
MORE EXPENSIVE TO BUILD MAYBE
THE DEVELOPERS ARE A LITTLE BIT
MORE SHALL WE SAY GREEDY THAN
THEY ARE HERE.
BUT I THINK THE CENTRAL POINT
STANDS AND WHEN I PRESS THE
PERSON WHO WAS PUSHING THAT
STUDY ON SOCIAL MEDIA THEN THE
RESPONSE WAS WELL THE THE HOUSE
WILL BE WILL BE MORE EXPENSIVE
THAN THE UNITS IN TWENTY FIFTY.
I ASK THE BASIS FOR THAT.
I GOT NO ANSWER TO THAT AT ALL
AND MY POINT IS REALLY THAT WE
NEED TO BE REALISTIC AND DEAL
IN REALITY RATHER THAN IDEOLOGY
IDEOLOGY AND FANTASY.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK THE HELLO HELLO MY NAME
IS BRENDAN RUTHS I LIVE AT ONE
TWENTY SEVEN FIELD STREET
APARTMENT TWO OR THREE AND
BEFORE I GET TO MY MAIN POINT I
DO WANT TO NOTE THAT JUST
FOCUSING ON THE INDIVIDUAL
PRICE IMPACTS ON AN INDIVIDUAL
INDIVIDUAL PARCEL AFTER
DENSIFICATION IGNORES THE
SECOND ORDER EFFECTS ON THE
REST OF THE MARKET FROM THE
INCREASE IN SUPPLY ESPECIALLY
IF THAT SUPPLY INCREASE IS
MARKET WIDE.
SO I THINK THAT THAT'S
SOMETHING THAT IS IMPORTANT TO
CONSIDER WHEN WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT THESE DENSIFICATION
OF INDIVIDUAL PARCELS.
BEYOND THAT I AM HERE TO SPEAK
IN SUPPORT OF MORE DENSITY AND
AN OPPOSITION TO THE LAST
MINUTE CREATION OF A NEW
DISTRICT ENTITY THREE UNIT
CEILING BEING PROPOSED FOR THE
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
I THINK THAT THIS PROPOSAL IS
ROOTED SOMEWHAT IN A FALSE
ASSUMPTION THAT DENSITY IS
SOMEHOW INCOMPATIBLE WITH
FAMILY LIFE, THAT FAMILIES ONLY
WANT TO LIVE IN LESS DENSE
AREAS, THAT YOU CAN'T BE A
FAMILY IN A DENSE AREA.
BUT IN REALITY SCARCITY IS
INCOMPATIBLE WITH FAMILY LIFE.
IT DOESN'T MATTER HOW FAMILY
FRIENDLY YOU THINK THAT LOW
DENSITY HOMES MAY BE IF
FAMILIES CAN'T AFFORD THEM TO
BEGIN WITH.
SO I DID A LITTLE EXPERIMENT.
I WENT ON ZILLOW IS THAT THE
MAX PRICE TO FOUR HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS WHICH I THINK
IS EXTREMELY GENEROUS FOR A
STARTER HOME FOR A YOUNG FAMILY
REALLY A HOME FOR ANY FAMILY
BECAUSE 400000 DOLLARS IS A LOT
OF MONEY.
WHEN I LIMITED THE SEARCH TO
JUST SINGLE FAMILY HOMES UNDER
THAT PRICE THERE ARE TWENTY ONE
FOR SALE ACROSS THE ENTIRE
CITY.
FIVE OF THOSE ARE OWNED BY THE
COMMUNITY LAND TRUST WHICH FINE
PROGRAM IT'S LIMITED TO A SMALL
SUBSET OF THE POPULATION SO IT
CAN'T BE OUR SOLUTION TO THE
HOUSING CRISIS.
>> I'M VERY CONFIDENT THAT MORE
THAN TWENTY ONE FAMILIES WANT
TO MOVE TO ANN ARBOR RIGHT NOW
THAT IF YOU ADD IN TOWN HOMES,
CONDOS, OTHER MULTIFAMILY
DEVELOPMENTS THAT NUMBER JUMPS
TO ONE HUNDRED AND SEVEN UNITS
THAT ARE BELOW FOUR HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS.
IT'S NOT PERFECT BUT THAT'S A
LOT BETTER THAN TWENTY ONE.
NINETY FIVE OF THOSE UNITS ALSO
HAVE MULTIPLE BEDROOMS WHICH
MEANS THEY WOULD BE AT LEAST IN
THEORY MORE SUITABLE FOR
FAMILIES.
CONTRARY TO WHAT SOME PEOPLE
WILL TELL YOU, FAMILIES DO LIVE
IN THESE TYPES OF HOUSING.
AS AN EXAMPLE, I PERSONALLY
LIVE IN A COMPLEX THAT'S A MIX
OF APARTMENTS, CONDOS AND
TOWNHOMES.
I CAN DEFINITIVELY SAY THAT
THERE ARE LOTS OF FAMILIES THAT
LIVE IN THAT DEVELOPMENT.
IT'S NOT A PERFECT PROXY FOR
THE ENTIRE CITY BECAUSE IT'S
NOT ITSELF A NEIGHBORHOOD.
IT'S JUST ONE COMPLEX BUT IT IS
A SCALE MODEL OF THE RIGHT
IDEAS.
NOT EVERYONE HAS THEIR OWN YARD
BUT THERE ARE COMMUNAL GREEN
SPACES AND A NEARBY PARK AND I
CAN SAY THAT FAMILIES,
CHILDREN, EVERYONE USES THAT
PARK AND THEY ENJOY IT NOT
EVERYONE NEEDS THEIR OWN YARD.
I ALSO HAVE TO SAY I SEE MORE
FAMILIES WITH KIDS OUT AND
ABOUT IN MY OWN COMPLEX THAN I
EVER SEE WHEN I WALK ON THE OLD
WEST SIDE OR OTHER RESIDENTIAL
NEIGHBORHOODS.
FAMILIES LIVE WHERE THEY CAN
AFFORD TO LIVE SO STARTING
AROUND THE TIME.
BUT HOW DO WE DEVELOP FAMILY
FRIENDLY DENSITY AT SCALE AND
WHY CAN'T WE DO IT WITH JUST
DUPLEXES AND TRIPLE XS IN
EFFECT EVEN IN THE MOST
OPTIMISTIC SCENARIO ONLY A
SMALL SUBSET OF RESIDENTIAL
PROPERTIES WILL EVER BE
REDEVELOPED.
WE NEED TO OPTIMIZE WE NEED TO
BE AS EFFICIENT AS POSSIBLE
WITH THESE PARCELS THAT DO GET
DEVELOPED IF WE EVER WANT TO
HAVE ANY OF THE SUPPLY IMPACTS
WE NEED.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH.
THANK YOU
.
HI MY NAME IS IRMA MAYAK TWO
EIGHT ZERO NINE BROCKMANN
BOULEVARD.
I WANT TO TALK A LITTLE ABOUT
THE IMPORTANCE OF TREES
AFFORDABLE AND HEALTHY
COMMUNITIES.
THIS MORNING'S NEW YORK TIMES
HAS AN ARTICLE ABOUT PARIS AND
HOW IT'S STONE CONCRETE AND
ASPHALT SURFACES CONTRIBUTE TO
THE RECORD HIGH TEMPERATURES
OF THE SUMMER PLANNERS.
THEIR PLANNING FOR PREPARING
FOR POSSIBLE FUTURE WITH EVEN
HIGHER TEMPS ARE FOCUSING ON
THE CITY'S LACK OF STREET
TREES.
THOUGH PARIS HAS STUNNING
GARDENS AND MAJESTIC PLAIN
TREES LINING THE SAND,
SCIENTISTS ARE RECOMMENDING THE
CITY INVEST MORE IN GREEN AND
SHADED YARDS AND MANY MORE
TREES THEY'VE BEGUN TO REMOVE
PAVING FROM THE CENTER
OF STREETS TO REPLACE IT WITH
TREES PARIS WITH THE
HIGHEST
POPULATION DENSITY IN EUROPE,
HAS BEEN CITED AS AN EXAMPLE
OF A DENSE, LIVABLE CITY BY
SUPPORTERS OF THE ADDED DENSITY
PROPOSED FOR ANN ARBOR.
BUT AS WE'RE LEARNING IN THIS
TIME OF CLIMATE CHANGE, DENSITY
HAS ITS COSTS.
THE HEAT EMERGENCIES THIS
SUMMER HAVE AGAIN COST LIVES
WITHOUT THE DATA TO CREATE A
FORWARD THINKING PLAN WE RISK
LOSING MANY OF THE TREES IN
GREEN SPACES WE HAVE NOW AND
CREATING HEAT ISLANDS OF TALL
BUILDINGS.
THE RECENT COUNTY WIDE HOUSING
STUDY BY THE LAKE COMMUNITY
FOUNDATION I HOPE YOU'VE HAD A
CHANCE TO STUDY THAT CONCLUDES
THAT WE HAVE A DEFICIT IN
HOUSING FOR THOSE AT LOWER TO
MID RANGE INCOMES.
THIS IS WHERE THE PLAN NEEDS TO
REFOCUS IN TERMS OF ADDED
SUPPLY BECAUSE THIS IS WHERE
THE GREATEST NEEDS ARE AND
BECAUSE HOMES DON'T TRICKLE
DOWN.
IN THE EARLY NINETEEN FORTIES
THE ANN ARBOR YPSILANTI AREA IS
DEALING WITH AN ACUTE RENTAL
SHORTAGE AND NEEDED HOUSING FOR
THE AREA'S MANY WAR EFFORT
WORKERS RESIDENT CHARLES NOBLE
PROPOSED THE LARGEST PRIVATE
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROJECT THAN
IN MICHIGAN PITTSFIELD VILLAGE.
IT WAS CONCEIVED OF AS A
COMMUNITY WITH QUALITY OF LIFE
AND A HEALTHY, HUMANE
ENVIRONMENT THAT'S GUIDING
PRINCIPLES.
HOMES WERE DESIGNED FOR BEAUTY
AND PERMANENCY WITH CURVING
DRIVES IN GROUPS OF HOMES
SURROUNDING A PARK PITTSFIELD
VILLAGE WHICH REMAINS
ATTAINABLE OPTION FOR MANY WAS
DESIGNED INTENTIONALLY WITH
HUMANIST VALUES NOT PROFIT
DRIVEN MOTIVE BY SPECULATORS
AND INVESTORS.
TODAY THAT GREEN SPACE AND
TREES CREATE HEALTHY
SURROUNDINGS FOR RESIDENTS AND
CONTRIBUTE TO THE CITY'S AIR
QUALITY AND MITIGATING CO2
LEVELS.
FOR THESE REASONS AND FOR ITS
HISTORICAL VALUE I'M CONCERNED
TO SEE PITTSFIELD VILLAGE
INCLUDED IN THE PLANS NEW
RESIDENTIAL ZONING CATEGORY.
THIS NEW DISTRICT THREATENS TO
REPLACE THE SUCCESSFULLY
DESIGNED GREEN AFFORDABLE
COMMUNITY WITH AN ENTIRELY NEW
QUADRILATERAL GRID URBAN SPACE
.
I THINK THE PITTSFIELD VILLAGE
IS THE LEVEL OF HOUSING WE NEED
TO KEEP AND TO ADD TO.
SO AGAIN WHAT'S THE PLAN
REFOCUS ON EXPANDING HOUSING
OPPORTUNITIES FOR LOWER AND
MIDDLE INCOME NEIGHBORS
STRENGTHEN OUR INFRASTRUCTURE
BOTH BUILT IN GREEN USE
ACCURATE DATA AND INCLUDE THE
DIRECT INVOLVEMENT OF ALL
RESIDENTS.
AND WHY NOT ADD SOME OF MR.
NOBLE'S VALUES TO THANK YOU FOR
ADDED THANK YOU
.
GOOD EVENING ANN ARBOR.
MY NAME IS JOE ZELJKO BIT
NINETEEN TWENTY WOODBURY DRIVE
ACCORDING TO THE NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS TWENTY
TWENTY THREE COMMUNITY AND
TRANSPORTATION PREFERENCES
SURVEY NEARLY HALF OF AMERICANS
WOULD PREFER TO LIVE IN A
WALKABLE COMMUNITY WHERE HOMES
ARE CLOSE TO SCHOOLS, SHOPS,
RESTAURANTS AND JOBS AND AMONG
YOUNGER ADULTS LIKE MYSELF THAT
PREFERENCE CLIMBS ABOVE 70
PERCENT MISSING MIDDLE HOUSING
IN TWENTY EIGHTEEN SPECIFICALLY
IDENTIFIED TOWNHOUSES DUPLEXES
AND FOUR PLEXUS AS DESIRABLE
FOR YOUNG FAMILIES AND THESE
HOUSING TYPES ALLOW FAMILIES TO
PROSPER IN WALKABLE
NEIGHBORHOODS AND IN TWENTY
TWENTY THREE BASIC STATEWIDE
STUDY SAID 60 PERCENT
OF PARENTS OF YOUNG CHILDREN
FAVORED LIVING IN DENSE MIXED
USE COMMUNITIES.
WHAT DOES ALL THIS MEAN?
IT MEANS THAT THERE ISN'T A GOD
GIVEN DEMAND TO LIVE IN A PLACE
LIKE PITTSFIELD TOWNSHIP.
THE REASON SO MANY FAMILIES END
UP THERE IS BECAUSE CITIES LIKE
OURS HAVE PRICED OUT HOMEOWNERS
AND OUR PUBLIC SCHOOLS IS
LOSING ENROLLMENT RIGHT NOW NOT
BECAUSE OF MULTIPLEX'S BUT
BECAUSE OF THE WAY THAT WE'RE
CURRENTLY BUILT.
THE LAST THING WE SHOULD BE
DOING IS SEVERELY RESTRICTING
FUTURE HOUSING POTENTIAL ACROSS
ANN ARBOR.
UNFORTUNATE THE NEW NEW
RESIDENTIAL CATEGORY AND THE
LAND USE PLAN DRAFT WOULD DO
EXACTLY THAT AS STAFF NOTED IT
WOULD FLIP CITY COUNCIL'S
DIRECTION HAD THREE UNITS
SHOULD BE A FLOOR AND NOT A
CEILING.
THESE CHANGES ALSO DELAY THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AS THOSE
ALREADY EIGHT MONTHS OR EVEN
TEN YEARS BEHIND SCHEDULE AND
WOULD ERASE THE LONG TERM
POTENTIAL FOR THOUSANDS OF NEW
OWNER OCCUPIED HOMES ACROSS THE
CITY.
NOW HERE'S WHERE I THINK THERE
MIGHT BE COMMON GROUND BOTH
FACTIONS OF ANN ARBOR POLITICS
,WHETHER THEY'RE PRO OR A.
TAYLOR SAY THEY WANT TO EXPAND
HOMEOWNERSHIP OPPORTUNITIES
THAT A VERY VALID CRITICISM IS
THAT TOO MUCH RECENT
DEVELOPMENT HAS BEEN TALL
APARTMENT TOWERS THAT ARE ONLY
AVAILABLE FOR RENT WHILE
MULTIPLEXED HOUSING CAN BE
OWNERSHIP HOUSING WHO
MULTIPLEX'S AND COURTYARD
APARTMENTS CAN BE SEPARATELY
DATED AND OWNED, NOT JUST
RENTED AND THEY'RE OFTEN THE
MOST AFFORDABLE PATH TO
OWNERSHIP FOR YOUNG FAMILIES
SENIORS LOOKING TO DOWNSIZE AND
PROFESSIONALS WHO WANT TO OWN
RATHER THAN RENT.
IF WE'RE SERIOUS ABOUT
EXPANDING HOMEOWNERSHIP
OPPORTUNITIES WE NEED TO ALLOW
FOR THESE HOUSING TYPES.
FINALLY, I URGE YOU NOT TO
DOWNGRADE THE TRANSITION AREAS
.
THESE AREAS WERE CAREFULLY
DESIGNED TO BALANCE
NEIGHBORHOOD CHARACTER THE NEED
FOR HOUSING PUT STORES IN LIKE
JEFFERSON MARKET AND WASHTENAW
DAIRY WHICH ARE CURRENTLY
ILLEGAL TO BUILD RIGHT NOW.
THEY WERE GRANDFATHERED IN AND
HAVE PEOPLE LIVE NEARBY MAJOR
ANN ARBOR AREA TRANSPORTATION
AUTHORITY CORRIDORS MAKING LIFE
BETTER FOR EVERYBODY.
RENTERS AND OWNERS ALIKE REJECT
THE NEW RESIDENTIAL CATEGORY.
PLEASE KEEP TRANSITION STRONG
AND WHEN IN DOUBT CHOOSE
WALKABILITY AND HOUSING
ABUNDANCE OVER CAR DEPENDENT
DEPENDENCY AND ARTIFICIAL
SCARCITY.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
>> GOOD EVENING.
COMMISSION KIRK WESTFALL THIRTY
FIVE OF FIVE CHARTER PLACE.
I JUST FIRST WANT TO RESPOND TO
A COUPLE OF ASSERTIONS I HEARD
ESPECIALLY SOME PEOPLE MIGHT
CONSIDER THEMSELVES
ACADEMICALLY INCLINED TRYING TO
LINK HOUSING FILTERING AND
HOUSING MIGRATION CHAINS WHICH
ARE ACADEMICALLY DEMONSTRATED
PROPERTIES WHEN YOU BUILD NEW
HOUSING SUPPLY TRYING TO
CONFLATE THAT WITH TRICKLE DOWN
ECONOMICS IS JUST AN IT'S AN
INTERESTING AND UNFORTUNATE
SORT OF ASSOCIATION.
BUT OTHER THAN THAT I JUST
WANTED TO THANK YOU FOR
FINISHING UP WORK ON THE PLAN.
THERE'S LOTS OF OPINIONS
OBVIOUSLY HOW TO ASSIGN
REMAINING PARCELS.
OF COURSE MY PREFERENCES
TRANSITION.
I THINK GIVING YOURSELF MAXIMUM
FLEXIBILITY GOING INTO THE
FUTURE ZONING PROCESS,
PROVIDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR
WALKABLE RETAIL AND MORE
HOUSING RATHER THAN LESS
IMPORTANT THE INCIDENTAL TYPES
OF RETAIL THAT WILL BE ALLOWED
IN RESIDENTIAL WILL BE PROBABLY
RARE AND ALSO VERY SMALL SCALE
AND WE NEED JUST MORE OPTIONS
FOR DAY TO DAY LIFE.
BUT I DO THINK THE OVERARCHING
PRIORITY IS TO FINISH THE
SUBSTANTIVE EDITS TONIGHT.
I DON'T THINK THAT WOULD BE
POSSIBLE BY INTRODUCING
ENTIRELY NEW LAND USE CATEGORY
THE NEW RESIDENTIAL CATEGORY
WILL CERTAINLY CREATE A NEW SET
OF BATTLES AND CONFUSION FIRST
OF ALL.
AND SECONDLY IT WILL DO THE
OPPOSITE OF WHAT COUNSEL
DIRECTED NEW RESIDENTIAL PUTS A
HARD THREE UNIT CAP IN MOST
OF THE LAND IN THE CITY THIS
ISN'T THE FLOOR THAT COUNCIL
ASKED FOR AND IS NOT CONTEXT
DEPENDENT.
AND LASTLY, THE NEW RESIDENTIAL
PROPOSAL DOWNGRADES AS HAS BEEN
POINTED OUT, MANY PARCELS THAT
YOU ALREADY COLLECTIVELY SPENT
A LOT OF TIME ON AND DECIDED
THAT SHOULD BE TRANSITIONED.
SO PLEASE DON'T ENTERTAIN THAT
PART OF THE PROPOSAL IF YOU
CAN'T COME TO A RESOLUTION IN A
TIMELY MANNER ON THE REMAINING
HANDFUL OF SITES LIKE SOMEBODY
FLOATED THE IDEA OF LEAVING
THEM UNCATEGORIZED FOR NOW
WHICH I THINK IS FINE IN THE
PLAN.
NOT EVERY PERSON NEEDS TO HAVE
A DESIGNATION AND THERE MIGHT
BE AN OPPORTUNITY TO PUT THEM
IN LIKE A TRANSITION LITE TYPE
OF ZONING CATEGORY ONE ZONING
BEGINS BUT EITHER WAY PLEASE
FIND A FRAMEWORK TONIGHT TO
FINISH UP THE MAJOR DECISIONS
SO WE CAN PUT ENERGY INTO
ZONING AS SOON AS POSSIBLE AND
ADDRESSING OUR HOUSING
SHORTAGE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
MY NAME IS RICHARD OCUS TWELVE
FORTY THREE MARBLE DRIVE
RECENTLY I READ THE TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE WASHTENAW COUNTY
HOUSING STUDY AND I WAS STUNNED
BY THE WEALTH DATA IN THEIR
STUDY.
WHERE IS THE CORRESPONDING DATA
IN YOUR PLAN COMPARED TO THIS
STUDY AS THE STUDY SHOWS WE
DON'T HAVE A HOUSING CRISIS.
WE HAVE AN AFFORDABILITY
CRISIS.
WE HAVE A UNIQUE SITUATION HERE
IN ANN ARBOR.
OUR POPULATION HAS BEEN
SHIFTING INTO THE ADS AND MEDS
RESULTING IN THE EDUCATIONAL
LEVEL MOVING UP AT THE SAME
TIME THE BABY BOOMERS WILL BE
SELLING AND MOVING INTO HIGHER
PRICED APARTMENTS.
THE RESULT WILL BE LESS
AFFORDABLE HOUSING THE COUNTIES
FAMILIES ARE INCREASING THE
HIGH INCOME WELL AND ARBOR IS A
MAJORITY RENTER OCCUPIED CITY.
ANYONE WITH INCOMES BELOW THE
INCOME OF FIFTY THOUSAND FACE
REAL PROBLEMS BELOW THIRTY FIVE
THOUSAND.
THEY SAY THEY FACE A REAL
CRISIS.
WHERE IN YOUR STUDY DO YOU HELP
THESE PEOPLE?
THERE ARE OTHER MISSING ITEMS
IN YOUR PLAN.
I DON'T SEE ANY COMMITMENT TO
REGIONAL PLANNING WITH
YPSILANTI OR THE TOWNSHIPS FOR
EXAMPLE.
WE NEED A NEW WATER SUPPLY AND
THAT'S GOING TO INVOLVE
REGIONAL PLANNING.
>> IT'S MISSING THE MICHIGAN
ZONING ENABLING ACT ALLOWS
ORDINANCES THAT REGULATE
ESTHETICS AND DESIGN TO HELP
GREATER DENSITY FIT INTO
NEIGHBORHOODS.
GRAND RAPIDS, FOR EXAMPLE, HAS
ONE I DON'T SEE ONE IN YOUR
PLAN REGARDING THE ASSIGNMENT
OF TRANSITION DISTRICTS.
THEY SHOULD BE LONG CORRIDORS
ONLY NOT EXTENDING INTO
NEIGHBORHOODS AND MINE IS A
GOOD EXAMPLE THAT WE ARE
BORDERED BY BOTH PACARD AND
SOUTH INDUSTRIAL AND THAT MEANS
THAT WE'LL HAVE AN ENCROACHMENT
FROM BOTH DIRECTIONS TO DAMAGE
OUR OUR NEIGHBORHOODS AND
CHANGE THEM DRASTICALLY.
I TAUGHT ECOLOGY FOR THIRTY
YEARS AND THE ENVIRONMENT IT'S
A MAJOR CONCERN FOR ME.
I WAS ON GOVERNOR BLANCHARD'S
ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY
COMMITTEE WITH A FOCUS ON CITY
TREES.
I'M WORRIED ABOUT THE LOSS
OF TREES AS YOUR PLAN REDUCES
SETBACKS WHERE TREES ARE
NORMALLY LOCATED, A SINGLE TREE
USES AS MUCH AS 11000 GALLONS
IN A SINGLE SEASON.
THEY PLAY A SIGNIFICANT ROLE IN
MANAGING RAIN WATER RUNOFF.
WE'RE IN
THE LANGUAGE DO I SEE
PROTECTION FOR SOLAR PANELS?
YOU HAVE SOME VAGUE WORDING
LISTED I THINK ON PAGE FORTY
TWO ABOUT R1 BUT NOTHING
DEALING WITH IT WITH TRANSITION
ZONES.
I LIVE IN ONE OF THOSE AREAS I
PRESENTLY AM ZONED OUT ONE I
HAVE A HOUSE AT MY PANELS ARE
ABOUT TEN FEET OFF THE GROUND
AND IF I HAVE AN EIGHT STOREY
BUILDING NEXT TO ME I'LL BE
SHADED.
>> THANKS
GOOD COMMISSIONERS.
MY NAME IS ERIC SHALAKO.
I'M A RESIDENT OF WARD FOUR.
I'M FETICH TO THE STRAIN THE
POLITICAL PRESSURE HAS HAD ON
YOUR JOB TO FINALIZE THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND PLAN.
BELIEVE ME I WANT TO GET A MOVE
ON TO THERE'S ALREADY ENOUGH
WORK TO DO BEFORE WE CAN PUT A
REAL DENT IN THE HOUSING CRISIS
BUT WE DON'T GET THERE BY
HOLDING BACK.
WE GET THERE BY ALLOWING PEOPLE
TO BUILD ORGANICALLY IN THE
NEIGHBORHOODS LIKE WE USED TO
ABOUT A CENTURY AGO.
WE GET THERE WITH HOUSING
THAT'S A SHORT WALK TO GROCERY
STORES, HARDWARE STORES, CAFES,
DAYCARES, TRANSIT WORK AND
EVERYTHING WE NEED TO DO ON A
DAILY BASIS WITHOUT EVER
NEEDING A CAR.
THERE'S A LITTLE BIT OF DENSITY
IN MY NEIGHBORHOOD BUT I LOVE
WHAT'S THERE AND I WANT MORE.
SO WHEN I SEE NEW DEVELOPMENTS
GOING AROUND MY HOME I DON'T GO
OH NO THE TRAFFIC OH NO.
THE NOISY UNDERGRADS.
OH NO THE HARMONIOUS
NEIGHBORHOOD CONTEXT IT MAKES
ME GO YES.
I CAN'T WAIT TO WALK TO THAT
CAFE WHEN IT OPENS.
YES MY FAMILY AND FRIENDS COULD
HAVE A SHOT OF LIVING HERE AND
MAN WHY CAN'T WE DO MORE OF US?
SO WITH THAT IN MIND HERE ARE
MY SUGGESTIONS REJECT THE NEW
RESIDENTIAL ZONE.
DO NOT DO NOT CAP THE NUMBER
OF STORIES IN TRANSITION AND
DEFAULT TO TRANSITION WHENEVER
WHENEVER POSSIBLE TO GET
ABUNDANT HOUSING AND RETAIL
OVER AND OVER GIVE PEOPLE THE
ABILITY TO CREATE WHAT THEY
WANT FOR THEIR NEIGHBORHOODS
WITHOUT UNNECESSARY RESTRAINTS
.
WE'VE BEEN IN A HOUSING CRISIS
FOR TOO LONG AND WE NEED
FLEXIBILITY.
WE REALLY WANT IN ANN ARBOR FOR
ALL THINK OF OUR WORK AND I
HOPE YOU HAVE A GOOD EVENING.
>> THANK YOU.
>> IF I COULD IF WE CAN KEEP MY
COMMENTS OUTSIDE OF THE
CHAMBERS I CAN HEAR YOU VERY
CLEARLY WHEN YOU ARE TRYING TO
WHISPER WHICH THEN DISTRACTS US
FROM GIVING OUR ATTENTION TO
THE SPEAKER AND THIS IS YOUR
MEETING AND SO WE WANT TO GIVE
OUR ATTENTION TO YOU SO THAT WE
CAN HEAR YOU CLEARLY.
>> SO IF YOU NEED TO HAVE A
SECOND CONVERSATION, WOULD YOU
PLEASE LEAVE THE CHAMBER AND
DON'T JUST GO INTO THE HALLWAYS
BECAUSE WE CAN STILL HEAR YOU.
IT ECHOES BACK IN YOU'LL NEED
TO GO ALL THE WAY OUT WHERE THE
ELEVATORS ARE AND TO ENSURE
THAT WE CAN GIVE OUR ATTENTION
TO THE SPEAKERS.
IS THAT OK?
OK, I MEAN WE HAVE TO D IT
OTHERWISE I'LL KEEP SUSPENDING
THE MEETING.
OK, I'M SORRY TO INTERRUPT YOU.
>> GO AHEAD.
NO PROBLEM.
MY NAME IS ADAM MCHUGH.
I LIVE AT 618 SOUTH MAIN
STREET.
I WAS ACTUALLY WATCHING THIS
ONLINE AND I KEPT HEARING ALL
THE DISINFORMATION AND STUFF
UPSETTING YOU SO I FELT LIKE I
NEEDED TO SHOW UP AND VOICE MY
OPINION.
I WANTED TO SHARE MY
DISPLEASURE WITH THE ADDED NEW
RESIDENTIAL ZONING AND
CONTINUED ATTEMPTS TO RESTRICT
HOUSING IN THE CITY OF ANN
ARBOR.
SO MY COMMENTS HERE AREN'T VERY
LONG.
I JUST WANT TO SAY THAT DENSITY
IS BETTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE
SURPRISE MORE ITEMS DOES MAKE
THE PRICE OF THOSE ITEMS GO
DOWN.
SOMEONE SUGGESTED HERE OR
TALKED ABOUT HOW IN PARIS
THEY'RE MAKING MORE GREEN SPACE
IN THE MIDDLE OF ROADS TO HELP
FIGHT CLIMATE CHANGE AND THE
HEAT INDEX OF CITIES.
I KNOW US BIKERS WOULD LOVE
THAT AND I DON'T KNOW WHY WE'RE
CONTINUING TO PANDER TO THE
MINORITY WHO WANT LESS HOUSING
WHEN THE VOTE ON THE LIBRARY
SEEMS TO ME LIKE A MAJORITY
SCREAM OF ANN ARBOR WANTS MORE
HOUSING DENSITY.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
HI.
MY NAME IS CHRIS OLSEN AND I
LIVE ON DAVOREN ROAD BUT I'M
HERE REPRESENTING WASHTENAW
CLIMATE REALITY WHICH IS A
CLIMATE WIDE NONPROFIT GROUP.
THE PREVIOUS SPEAKER KIND
OF SAID IN THE MOVIE WHAT I WAS
GOING TO SAY BUT JUST TO
UNDERSCORE SOME THINGS AS A
RETIRED WATERSHED ECOLOGIST I
CAN TELL YOU FROM ALL THE
READING I'VE BEEN DOING ABOUT
CLIMATE HOUSING AND DEVELOPMENT
THAT THE BEST WAY TO ADDRESS
CLIMATE CHANGE, THE BEST WAY TO
ADDRESS GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE,
THE BEST WAY TO KEEP YOUR OWN
RIVER CLEAN IS DENSITY.
THE PLAN THAT YOU ARE ARE ARE
WORKING ON IS GOING TO RESULT
IN GETTING US CLOSER TO REACH
OUR ZERO CARBON GOALS.
WE CITIES LIKE WHAT CITY
VANDERBURGH IS TRYING TO BUILD
THERE PEOPLE DON'T HAVE TO RELY
ON CARS FOR TRAVEL, BE FORCED
TO MOVE FURTHER AWAY FROM WHERE
THEY WORK IN SCHOOL AND WHERE
THEY HAVE SCHOOL.
IT WILL NOT CONVERT FARMLAND,
FORESTS, WETLANDS AND OTHER
WILDLIFE HABITAT INTO
SUBDIVISIONS.
IT WON'T CONTINUE TO COUGH UP
CARBON POLLUTION ON A PER
HOUSEHOLD BASIS.
SO I THINK THAT YOU KNOW THAT
WHAT YOU'RE WORKING ON AND
PROVIDING WELL-DESIGNED DENSITY
WITHIN A CITY THAT WILL BE
LIVABLE AND WILL BE A GOOD
PLACE FOR PEOPLE OF ALL WALKS
OF LIFE TO LIVE IS THE BEST
THING THAT YOU CAN DO FOR
CLIMATE, FOR WATER QUALITY AND
FOR THE TREES.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
HI MY NAME IS MICHELLE
CATERALL.
I LIVE ON THE WEST SIDE OF ANN
ARBOR AT FOUR TWO THREE WEST
LIBERTY.
I LIVE NEAR JEFFERSON MARKET
AND STOP TO HIGHLIGHT SOME
LOCAL FAVORITES OF THE TOWN
THERE JUST A BLOCK OR TWO AWAY
FROM ME AND I REALLY ENJOYED
LIVING NEAR THESE BUSINESSES.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT MAKES MY
NEIGHBORHOOD GREAT IS THE MIX
OF HOUSING INCLUDING SMALL
APARTMENTS, SMALL APARTMENTS
THAT ARE NO LONGER PERMITTED BY
ZONING BUT I HOPE WILL BECOME
PERMITTED AGAIN BY ZONING IN
THE FUTURE AND THEY LET MORE
PEOPLE AFFORD TO LIVE CLOSE TO
DOWNTOWN AND NEAR THESE SORT
OF BELOVED NEIGHBORHOOD
BUSINESSES THAT KEEPS THINGS
WALKABLE, IT KEEPS THINGS
VIBRANT.
AND IF YOU ADD TO THAT THE
PROXIMITY OF THE WEST SIDE TO
JOBS AND BUSINESSES DOWNTOWN,
IT MEANS THAT I AND MY
NEIGHBORS CAN ACCOMPLISH MUCH
OF WHAT WE WANT AND NEED TO DO
WITHOUT DRIVING A CAR.
IN A WARMING CLIMATE WHERE
TRANSPORTATION ACCOUNTS FOR A
MASSIVE SHARE OF EMISSIONS, I
THINK THE PLURALITY REDUCING
CAR USE PAYS MASSIVE CLIMATE
DIVIDENDS.
SO THAT MAKES ME WORRY THAT THE
NEW RESIDENTIAL AS A CATEGORY
WILL MOVE US BACKWARDS AS A
CITY FOR THOSE WHO HAVE
CONCERNS ABOUT TRAFFIC OR NOISE
OR OTHER IMPACTS
OF NONRESIDENTIAL CASES IN
THEIR NEIGHBORHOOD, CONSIDER
HOW DELIGHTFUL YOU FIND THE FEW
EXISTING GRANDFATHERED IN LOCAL
BUSINESSES.
IT WOULD BE AWESOME TO HAVE
MORE AND MORE OF THESE POCKETS
OF RETAIL RESTAURANTS AND SMALL
BUSINESSES WALKING DISTANCE
FROM PEOPLE ALL THROUGHOUT THE
CITY.
WITH THAT IN MIND, PLEASE KEEP
TRANSITION INTACT TRANSITION
AREAS INTACT TO ALLOW MORE
HOUSING AND BUSINESS OPTIONS
THROUGHOUT OUR CITY.
IT'S A GOOD CATEGORIZATION.
IT INCLUDES STEP DOWNS TO
ACCOUNT FOR NEIGHBORHOOD
CONTEXTS AS IT APPROACHES
RESIDENTIAL SUPPORTS MIXED USES
AND OFFERS THE FLEXIBILITY AND
DIVERSITY OF HOUSING OPTIONS
THAT WE NEED AS A CITY.
PLEASE MOVE THE PLAN FORWARD.
KEEP TRANSITION ZONING BROADLY
APPLICABLE AND KEEP THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN
SIMPLE.
THANKS FOR LISTENING.
>> THANK YOU
.
>> GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS DONOVAN ONE EIGHT
NINE ZERO UPLINE DRIVE.
I WANT TO TALK FIRST OF ALL
ABOUT THE PLANS.
IT'S NOT LIKE WE CAN'T GO TO
INTERFACES PORTFOLIO AND SEE
THE WORK THEY'VE DONE FOR OTHER
CITIES.
WE CAN SEE SUPERIOR WORK.
THIS IS A CLOWN CAR OK BUT
SINCE I WAS I'M IN A
NEIGHBORHOOD THAT WAS ANNEXED
FROM THE TOWNSHIP I WENT TO
ANOTHER TOWNSHIP.
OK, THIS PLAN NO CARTOON'S DATA
DRIVEN EXCELLENT.
EVERY CHANGE THEY MAKE IS IN
RED AND THEY'RE IN A THREE TO
FOUR YEAR CITIZEN INPUT PLAN.
OK, SO NOW AFTER I'VE SAID THAT
THE NEXT THING I WANT TO TALK
ABOUT IS THE USE OF THE TERM
STORIES.
YOU NEED DIMENSIONS.
YOU NEED ACTUAL FEET AND INCHES
OR METERS.
THERE ARE NO DIMENSIONS WITH
STORIES NEVER FORGET THE FIRST
STORY OF THE WORLD TRADE CENTER
WAS 93 FEET TALL.
SO YOU'RE ON A SLIPPERY BY
USING THE TERM STORIES.
LISA, I CALLED YOU THE OTHER
DAY WITH SOME QUESTIONS I HAD
AND YOUR PHONE CONNECTED AND
MADE SOME SOUNDS AND EVERYTHING
AND THEN IT JUST DISCONNECTED
THE CALL.
SO I DON'T KNOW IF YOU'RE
HAVING PROBLEMS OR WHAT.
>> ALSO MY LITTLE STREET I'M
HERE FOR MY LITTLE STREET
TONIGHT.
HERE'S YOUR PLAN.
HERE'S WHAT YOU'RE DOING.
YOU CAN'T SEE THIS BUT THE
LITTLE SPOT THAT'S ACROSS FROM
NORTH CAMPUS IT'S A LITTLE BLOB
OF ORANGE WHICH IS YOUR LITTLE
DISTRICT.
THAT'S WHERE THE PLYMOUTH ROAD
MALL IS.
MY VET IS THERE.
THE RESTAURANTS ARE THERE, THE
BOOKSTORE IS THERE AND WE'RE
THE LITTLE SINGLE LANE STREET
THAT DEAD ENDS INTO LESLIE
PARKWOOD.
WE ARE SURROUNDED ON EITHER
SIDE BY WILLOW TREE APARTMENTS
AND PARK POINTE APARTMENTS.
SO IN YOUR WISDOM FROM OUTER
SPACE, YOU KNOW, LIKE THE POWER
OF TEN YOU HAVE DECIDED THAT
WHOLE THING SHOULD BE IN A
TRANSITION.
SO YOU HAVE YOUR LITTLE BLOB
OF YELLOW AND I UNDERSTAND
SOMEONE ON THIS GROUP SAID THAT
ANYTHING THAT'S ADJACENT TO THE
UNIVERSITY SHOULD SUBMIT TO
BEING ABSORBED BY THE
UNIVERSITY BOLONEY THEIR HOMES
AND MY LITTLE STREET THERE ARE
NEW HOMES, OLDER HOMES, THE
OLDER HOMES.
SOME OF THEM ARE PROBABLY ONE
HUNDRED YEARS OLD AT LEAST WE
CAME IN FROM THE TOWNSHIP WHEN
WE WERE ANNEXED AND WE ALL HAD
WELLS AND SEPTIC SYSTEMS WHICH
WE HAD TO BE DISCONNECTED.
THEY'RE STILL THERE.
WE PAY TAXES, VERY HIGH TAXES.
WE PAY MILEAGES ALL THE
VILLAGES WE HAVE NO PAVED
STREETS.
WE LIKE IT LIKE THAT, NO
STREETLIGHTS AND NO SIDEWALKS.
SO WE'RE LIKE A DONOR STATE.
WE'RE LIKE A DEMOCRATIC DONOR
STATE.
WE PAY ALL THESE TAXES BUT WE
DON'T REALLY USE THEM FOR
SERVICES.
WE DON'T TAKE MUCH TWICE A YEAR
THEY COME WITH A RATE GREATER
AND THEY BELIEVE THE ROAD WE'RE
VERY
HAPPY BUT YOU'LL HAVE
DECIDED ARBITRARILY TO SNAP
THAT, YOU KNOW, ZONE OVER SO
THAT A TARGET ON US.
>> THANK YOU.
GIVING CONSENT THIS BY GAURAV
KOKANEE ONE THREE NINE ACTUALLY
MEUS DRIVE SOME PAST SPEAKERS
HAVE TALKED ABOUT HOW WE DON'T
HAVE A HOUSING CRISIS.
WE HAVE AN AFFORDABILITY CRISIS
AND CONCERNS AROUND
GENTRIFICATION AND I THINK
DISPLACEMENT IS REALLY
IMPORTANT ISSUE TO TALK ABOUT.
AND SO TO PREVENT DISPLACEMENT
MAY I PROPOSE BUILDING A LOT
MORE HOUSING IN OUR WEALTHIEST
NEIGHBORHOODS, THE INNER RING
NEIGHBORHOODS CLOSEST TO OUR
JOB CENTERS AND LET A LOT MORE
PEOPLE LIVE THERE.
COUNCIL MEMBER ACKMANN SHARED
ON SOCIAL MEDIA PHOTOS OF FOUR
AND FIVE PLACES IN A
RESIDENTIAL CATEGORY IN LOWER
BERN'S PARK.
THESE ARE HOUSES THAT FROM THE
OUTSIDE YOU COULDN'T TELL
WHETHER IT WAS ONE UNIT OR FOUR
UNITS OR FIVE UNITS AND
SPECIFICALLY CALLED OUT THAT
THESE ARE EXAMPLES OF THE SORT
OF HOUSING THE RESOLUTION THAT
SHE VOTED FOR OR SHOULD SUPPORT
THE TEXT OF THAT RESOLUTION
TALKED ABOUT HOW WE SHOULD
ALLOW LARGER BUILDING
TYPOLOGIES IF IT FITS IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD CONTEXT.
AND SO WHAT I WANT TO SAY IS DO
NOT LIMIT RESIDENTIAL CATEGORY
THE RESIDENTIAL CATEGORY TO
THREE UNITS WHICH GOES AGAINST
THE LETTER AND SPIRIT OF THE
COUNCIL RESOLUTION.
THERE'S A FOOTNOTE IN THE
PLANNING MEMO THAT TALKS ABOUT
WHETHER MAYBE LARGER BUILDING
TYPOLOGY SHOULD JUST REFER TO
NEW RESIDENTIAL AND NOT THE
EXISTING RESIDENTIAL COUNCIL
MEMBERS HAVE POINTED TO
SPECIFIC AREAS IN THE CITY THAT
ARE IN THE OLD RESIDENTIAL THAT
SHOULD ALLOW FOR LARGER THAN
LIKE MORE THAN THREE UNITS AND
SO PLEASE DO NOT LIMIT
RESIDENTIAL CATEGORY TO THREE
UNITS AND ALLOW A LOT MORE UP
ZONING IN THE PLACES THAT
PEOPLE WANT TO LIVE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
HI, I'M KATHY CHOW WITH YOUR
WORD FOR I WANT TO SPEAK IN
SUPPORT OF HIGHER DENSITY AND
HIGHER SUPPLY OF DIVERSE TYPES
OF HOUSING SO THAT PEOPLE CAN
HAVE A CHOICE TO LIVE IN ANN
ARBOR GROWING UP I'VE LIVED IN
AN ERA OF HOUSING AS A CHILD I
LIVE IN A COMPLEX CONDO
COMPLEX.
I HAD MANY NEIGHBORS WHICH
MEANT MANY PLAYMATES BECAUSE
THERE ARE MANY SHARED AREAS.
I WAS WALKING DISTANCE TO A
PLAYGROUND A PARK IN MY SCHOOL
SO MY PARENTS ALWAYS KNEW I WAS
NEVER TOO FAR AWAY.
IT FELT RESIDENTIAL AND SAFE
AND THE COMPLEX WAS A WONDERFUL
CHOICE FOR OUR YOUNG FAMILY AND
I REALLY LIKE THAT PLACE WHEN
WE IMMIGRATED TO THE U.S. WE
LIVED IN AN APARTMENT BUILDING
RENTING GAVE FLEXIBILITY AND
ALLOWED US TO HAVE A LANDING
PAD BEFORE FIGURING OUT WHERE
TO LIVE NEXT.
IT ALSO ALLOWED US TO LIVE IN A
LOCATION THAT WAS WALKING
DISTANCE TO OUR NEW SCHOOL.
SINCE WE ONLY HAD ONE CAR IT
MAY NOT HAVE BEEN POSSIBLE TO
FIND A SINGLE FAMILY HOME THAT
WAS THAT CLOSE.
IT WAS MUCH EASIER TO FIND AN
APARTMENT.
EVENTUALLY WE MOVED TO A SINGLE
FAMILY HOME WITH A YARD WE GOT
THE SECOND CAR AND ALSO A CAT.
THE POINT IS AS WE GO THROUGH
LIFE DIFFERENT KINDS OF HOUSING
MAY FIT US BETTER THAN OTHERS.
IT IS GREAT TO HAVE CHOICES
WHEN OUR LIFE CIRCUMSTANCES
CHANGE IN MY CURRENT LIFE
CIRCUMSTANCE A CONDO TRIPLEX
FITS ME BEST.
I'M NOT BUILT FOR YARD WORK.
HOUSE MAINTENANCE IS SCARY AND
STRESSFUL TO ME.
I DON'T WANT A YARD OR A BIG
PLACE I NEED TO CLEAN AND
BECAUSE I WAS A SINGLE INCOME
HOME BUYER A SINGLE FAMILY
HOUSE WAS OUT OF MY BUDGET AND
TOO MUCH WORK HAVING DIFFERENT
CHOICES IT WAS IS WHAT CAN MAKE
THIS CITY IN ANN ARBOR FOR ALL
RESIDENTS OF ALL WALKS OF LIFE
WHETHER THEY ARE STUDENTS,
YOUNG PROFESSIONALS, FAMILIES,
EMPTY NESTERS OR RETIREES CAN
CHOOSE WHAT HOUSING OPTIONS FIT
THEIR BUDGETS AND THEIR LIFE
CIRCUMSTANCES LIMITING THE MENU
OF HOUSING OPTIONS THROUGH UNIT
CAPS AND EXCLUSIONARY ZONING
ONLY DRIVES PEOPLE AWAY IF YOU
HAVE A DIETARY RESTRICTION AND
NOTHING ON THE MENU CAN
ACCOMMODATE YOU, YOU WILL GO TO
A DIFFERENT RESTAURANT IN OUR
HOUSING MARKET AND OPTIONS ARE
EXCLUDING PEOPLE FROM LIVING
HERE.
WE NEED MORE OPTIONS SO THE NRA
CAN BE AFFORDABLE, EQUITABLE
AND DYNAMIC.
PLEASE DO NOT SPEND TIME
SPLITTING THE RESIDENTIAL
CATEGORY ADDING UNIT CAPS WHEN
THERE'S ALREADY A TRANSITION
CATEGORY.
INSTEAD KEEP A PLAN FLEXIBLE
AND MOVING FORWARD SO THAT
EVERYONE HAS A PLACE AT THE
TABLE.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
GREG MONROE TWELVE
SIXTY ONE BENDING ROAD SO THANK
YOU FOR THE NEW RESIDENTIAL
CATEGORY AND I THINK WE SHOULD
DEFINE A CAP AND I THINK IT
SHOULD BE CLOSE TO THREE
STORIES I THINK IT SHOULD OR IN
ITSELF TO ITS CURRENT USES AND
ALLOW FOR REASONABLE GENTLE
DENSITY GROWTH MOVING FORWARD
THE NEXT THING I WANT TO TALK
ABOUT IS IF I WANTED TO KIND
OF CLARIFY I THINK SOME FOLKS
WHO I GUESS OPPONENTS OF THIS
PLAN I THINK A LOT OF FOLKS ARE
FOR DENSITY IN THEIR
NEIGHBORHOODS AND WHEN WE TALK
ABOUT HEIGHT I THINK THEIR
CONCERNS STEM FROM, YOU KNOW,
THIS FEELING OF SORT OF BEING
BOXED IN A CANYON OR ACCESS TO
SUNLIGHT AND NATURAL LIGHT AND
SO I WANTED TO PROPOSE SOME
SORT OF COMPROMISE WHEN I LIVED
IN DETROIT I LIVED IN A
FOURPLEX SO TWO STOREY BUILDING
THAT HAD FOUR CONDOMINIUMS IN
IT.
AND SO AGAIN THAT IS MORE THAN
THE THREE UNIT CAP THAT
EXISTED.
IT WAS ALSO TWO STORIES.
AND SO IF YOU KNOW, IF I WAS A
RESIDENT OF A NEIGHBORHOOD
WHERE THERE'S A SINGLE FAMILY
RANCH HOUSE THAT I'M LIVING IN,
I WOULD BE LESS WORRIED ABOUT
THAT BEING BUILT NEXT DOOR TO
ME AS OPPOSED TO A THREE STOREY
THREE STOREY CONSISTING
OF HOWEVER MANY UNITS WE WANT
TO DEFINE.
I UNDERSTAND THAT THREE STORIES
IS ALLOWED TODAY IN OUR ZONING
BUT YOU KNOW, I DON'T THINK IT
NECESSARILY NEEDS TO BE AND
IT'S PART OF THIS COMPROMISE.
I GUESS I WOULD ALSO PROPOSE
THAT SURE.
IF ALL OF THE STRUCTURES AROUND
THIS NEW BUILD ARE TWO STORIES
THAT'S GREAT.
WE CAN GO UP TO THREE.
BUT IF EVERYTHING IS ONE STORY
WE CAN GO UP TO TWO AND WE GET
FOUR UNITS IN THERE.
I FEEL LIKE THAT DOES BRING
DENSITY AND IS A DECENT
COMPROMISE MOVING FORWARD.
SO THE OTHER THING I WANTED TO
TOUCH ON IS I I'VE SPENT SOME
TIME READING SOME OF THE
LITERATURE, THE ACADEMIC
ARTICLES ALTHOUGH I DO THINK
THAT THERE IS SOME SORT
OF BARRIER THAT WE'RE EXPECTING
NORMAL PEOPLE TO READ ACADEMIC
ARTICLES TO PARTICIPATE IN THIS
DISCUSSION.
HOWEVER, I WANT TO UNDERSTAND
FROM THE PROPONENTS OF THIS
PLAN THE ACTUAL METRICS ON HOW
HOUSING SUPPLY IS GOING TO
DECREASE RENTS.
RIGHT.
SO I'VE READ SOME STUDIES THAT
SAY EVERY 10 PERCENT MORE
HOUSING STOCK DECREASED RENT BY
ONE PERCENT.
I'VE READ OTHERS THAT SAY EVERY
FIVE PERCENT INCREASE IN
HOUSING STOCK DECREASES BY ONE
PERCENT.
SO BEFORE I VENTURE A GUESS
BECAUSE I DID SOME MATH USING
THE AVERAGE RENT OF ABOUT
TWENTY THREE HUNDRED PER MONTH
FROM ZILLOW, I WOULD LOVE TO
HEAR FROM THE PROPONENTS
EXACTLY HOW MUCH HOUSING IS
GOING TO MOVE THE NEEDLE IN
TERMS OF HOW MUCH PRICE
DECREASE IN RENT.
I WOULD ALSO LIKE TO UNDERSTAND
THE SAME ON FILTERING BECAUSE
AS I UNDERSTAND IT FILTERING IS
A LONG TERM LIMITED MECHANISM.
RIGHT.
AND THE REASON I'M ASKING ALL
THIS IS AND I THINK WHAT A LOT
OF PEOPLE ARE CONCERNED ABOUT
ME FIRST AND FOREMOST IS THAT A
LOT OF THE NEW UNITS BEING
BUILT, THE CONDOMINIUMS
THEMSELVES ARE INCREDIBLY
EXPENSIVE.
IT'S EXPENSIVE TO BUILD RIGHT
NOW.
SO UNITS THAT LIST AT ONE POINT
EIGHT FIVE MILLION OR ONE POINT
ONE MILLION ONE POINT FIVE
MILLION.
>> RIGHT.
SO HOW LONG?
THANK YOU FOR THOSE UNITS HAVE
FILTER BECOME AFFORDABLE.
THANK YOU.
AND WHAT SORT OF RELIEF DOES IT
ACTUALLY GIVE RENTERS?
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
>> HELLO SHANNON LOWE TWO EIGHT
SEVEN ZERO OAKDALE DRIVE.
I AGREE WITH A LOT OF THE
SENTIMENTS HERE TODAY
SURROUNDING THE DETRIMENTS
OF THE NEW RESIDENTIAL CATEGORY
,THE DANGERS OF UNIT UNIT
LIMITS AND ITS IMPACT ON
DELAYING THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN.
TONIGHT I'M GOING TO FOCUS ON
THE TRANSITION CATEGORY AND THE
VISION IT CARRIES BECAUSE I
THINK THIS IS WHAT STARTED THE
WHOLE CONVERSATION SO FAR A LOT
OF THE LANGUAGE SURROUNDING THE
TRANSITION CATEGORY HAS
CONFINED TO A NARROW MONOLITHIC
VIEW THAT IT SHOULD BE A LINEAR
CORRIDOR, THAT IT SHOULD BE
YOUR HUB AREAS LOCATED ON
EXISTING TRANSIT LINES OR THAT
IT SHOULD HAVE SOME EXISTING
SENSE OF DENSITY.
WE SHOULDN'T PLACING THESE
CONSTRAINTS ON THIS CATEGORY.
WE WANT TO ACTIVELY WORKS
AGAINST OUR CITIES VALUES AND
WE CERTAINLY SHOULDN'T BE
PRESERVING EXISTING
EXCLUSIONARY ZONING BY
HANDPICKING MORE DENSITY AND
USES SHOULD OR SHOULD NOT BE
ALLOWED.
SIMPLY PUT, IF WE'RE TRYING TO
FIX INEQUITABLE PATTERNS WE
CANNOT BE ENFORCING THOSE SAME
PATTERNS IN THE BLUEPRINT FOR A
FUTURE.
ANOTHER COMMON ARGUMENT IS THAT
A GIVEN PERSON OR NEIGHBORHOOD
DOESN'T FIT THE VIBE
OF TRANSITION AND BEHIND THAT
IS SOME UNDERLYING ASSUMPTION
WHAT TRANSITION WOULD LOOK LIKE
FOR THAT NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> BUT THE ISSUE IS NONE OF US
HERE KNOW WHAT IT LOOK LIKE IN
TWENTY FIVE YEARS.
SO WE NEED TO ALLOW FOR EACH
NEIGHBORHOOD TO ADAPT AND
EVOLVE OVER TIME AS IT NEEDS
AND THAT'S WHY WE SHOULD THINK
OF TRANSITION AS THIS BIG
BUCKET OF POSSIBILITIES A BROAD
SPECTRUM FROM RESIDENTIAL TO
COMMERCIAL AND FROM THREE
STORIES TO POSSIBLY HIRE AND
THAT'S A MAXIMUM HEIGHT NOT
EVEN THE AVERAGE LAST NIGHT
WHEN TALKING TO SOME NEIGHBORS
ABOUT POTENTIAL ABILITY TO
TRANSITION, THEY SHARED WITH ME
THEIR DREAMS.
WOULDN'T IT BE AWESOME TO HAVE
A BAKERY NEARBY SERVING FRESH
LOAVES A LOCAL BOOKSTORE WITH A
SIDE CAFE FOR ALL OF US TO HANG
OUT A SHARED MARKET HALL FOR
SMALL BUSINESSES AND FOOD
STORES WHERE YOU CAN WALK
AROUND A FIRST FLOOR GROCERY
STORE WITH HOUSING ABOVE IT
WE'RE TALKING DAYCARES, MUSIC
AND DANCE STUDIOS AND
RECREATION CENTERS PLACES FOR
KIDS, ADULTS AND SENIORS AND
WHATEVER IMAGE THAT CAME UP IN
YOUR MIND, PLEASE REMEMBER THAT
THERE ARE PLENTY OTHER DESIGNS,
SHAPES AND SIZES THAT ARE
POSSIBLE AND THAT'S THE
BEAUTIFUL DYNAMIC RANGE OF THE
TRANSITION CATEGORY.
I FULLY BELIEVE THAT IN SOME
YEARS TIME CA DOMINATING AREAS
CAN BECOME BEAUTIFUL MIXED USE
NODES IF WE DESIGN IT.
SO LET'S DO SOMETHING TODAY TO
MAKE THE CITY AFFORDABLE AND
SUSTAINABLE AND BUILD A
COMMUNITY WHERE EVERYONE FEELS
THEY BELONG.
PLEASE REJECT THE NEW CATEGORY
BUT OUR THREE OUR FOUR HAVE THE
BEAUTIFUL POTENTIAL
OF TRANSITION AND LET'S KEEP
MOVING WITH THIS PLANET BETTER
ANN ARBOR THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU
.
MY NAME IS TRICIA HACKNEY.
I LIVE AT THE CROSSING SAVANNAH
RIVER CONDOMINIUMS AND HAVE FOR
TWENTY FIVE YEARS I BOUGHT IT
FOR ONE HUNDRED
FIFTEEN
THOUSAND IN TWO THOUSAND AND
PLANNED TO STAY THROUGH
RETIREMENT TRANSITION ZONES
SUCH AS MINE MEANS YOUR
COMMUNITY IS TARGETED FOR
DEVELOPMENT.
THIS POTENTIALLY MEANS THE CITY
IS ASKING YOU TO MOVE.
NOT ONLY ARE THEY ASKING YOU TO
MOVE IN ALL LIKELIHOOD IT WILL
BE TO LEAVE IN IBER AS PROPERTY
PRICES, TAXES AND INCREASES
MAKE A MOVE ALL BUT IMPOSSIBLE
TO STAY THE MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD
INCOME FOR RESIDENTS IN WARD
ONE IS EIGHTY ONE THOUSAND,
WHICH MEANS MANY RESIDENTS MAY
QUALIFY FOR AVALON HOUSING
WHILE THE CITY IS PROMOTING NEW
AFFORDABLE HOUSING BY REZONING
IN SOME CASES THEY'RE TURNING
THEIR BACK ON AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
SORRY TO HEAR AVALON HOUSING IS
A GREAT START BUT IS A MINIMAL
PERCENTAGE OF THE OVERALL
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
THE CROSSING'S ALREADY ARE
AFFORDABLE, DENSE, DIVERSE,
WALKABLE.
IT DEFIES LOGIC TO BUILD NEW
AFFORDABLE HOUSING WHILE YOU'RE
ELIMINATING EVEN MORE
AFFORDABLE HOMES.
>> ANN ARBOR ALREADY HAS.
OUR NEIGHBORHOOD IS BY NO MEANS
BLIGHTED BUT HOUSEHOLD INCOMES
HAVE NOT KEPT PACE WITH
PROPERTY VALUES OR STATEWIDE
AND NATIONWIDE.
ADD TO THAT AND OUR KEEPS
MOVING THE GOALPOSTS ON ZONING
EVERY TWO OR THREE YEARS MAKING
IT HARD FOR MIDDLE CLASS
SELLERS AND BUYERS TO PLAN FOR
THEIR HOUSING FUTURES
CONSTRUCTION SITES ARE
UBIQUITOUS THROUGHOUT THE CITY
CURRENTLY, RECENTLY, CURRENTLY
AND IN THE NEAR FUTURE.
GOOD NEWS FOR TAX REVENUE TO
OFFSET THE FIFTY HOUSES LOST
EMINENT I MEAN I PERSONALLY
LIKE MOST OF THE BUILDING GOING
UP.
HOWEVER THE IRONY OF MULTI
DOLLAR MULTIMILLION DOLLAR
CONDOS BEING BUILT A BLOCK AWAY
FROM ME TO THE WEST AND TO THE
SOUTH WHILE SIMULTANEOUSLY
POSSIBLY ASKING OUR COMMUNITY
TO MOVE IS DEMORALIZING.
IN CLOSING I WOULD LIKE TO ASK
EVERYONE HERE ARE YOU WILLING
TO GIVE UP YOUR HOME?
ARE YOU WILLING TO GIVE UP
EVERYTHING YOU'VE WORKED FOR?
CAN YOU AFFORD TO MOVE HOW CAN
YOU ASK OF ME AND MY COMMUNITY
TO GIVE UP THOSE HOMES IF YOU
ARE NOT WILLING TO?
IT IS CLEAR THE PLANNING
COMMITTEE HAS THE AUTHORITY TO
CHANGE LIVES DRAMATICALLY WITH
ZONING LAWS.
APPLY THEM AS IF YOUR HOME
DEPENDS ON IT.
>> THANK YOU
.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS ERICA HILL AND I
LIVE ON CHANNELER ROAD IN THE
FIRST WARD.
THANK YOU AGAIN FOR ALL OF YOUR
TIRELESS WORK AND DEDICATION.
I'D LIKE TO ENCOURAGE YOU TO
KEEP THINGS SIMPLE AND GET THE
FINAL DRAFT OF THE PLAN IN
FRONT OF COUNCIL AS SOON AS
POSSIBLE.
I THINK THE PLAN ALREADY DOES A
GREAT JOB OF EXPLAINING THE
SELF TAPERING FEATURE
OF TRANSITION.
I THINK THIS MEANS THAT
TRANSITION IS A PERFECT
CATEGORY FOR ALL THE CURRENT R
THREE AND R FOR PARCELS BECAUSE
A SMALL PARCEL ON THE EDGE
OF TRANSITION COULD END UP
BEING ZONED WITH THE SAME EXACT
FORM BASE LIMITS AS AN ADJACENT
LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL PARCEL.
AS YOU'VE STATED IN THE DRAFT
PLAN, TRANSITION AREAS SHOULD
ENABLE FIFTEEN MINUTE
NEIGHBORHOODS BY COVERING NOT
JUST CORRIDORS BUT KEYNOTES AS
WELL.
THIS TYPE THE TYPES OF LIMITED
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL USES
AND VISION FOR THE LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL CATEGORY ARE NOT
LIKELY TO MEET THE DAILY NEEDS
OF A FIFTEEN MINUTE
NEIGHBORHOOD.
PERSONALLY I'D LIKE TO LEGALIZE
ALL TYPES OF WALKABLE
BUSINESSES IN MY NEIGHBORHOOD.
YES, INCLUDING PINBALL PARLORS,
THEATERS, BEER GARDENS AND ALL
THE OTHER THINGS THAT MAY HAVE
DRIVEN MORAL PANICS ONE HUNDRED
YEARS AGO THE ONLY REALISTIC
NUISANCE USES THAT I CAN THINK
OF ARE PARKING LOT DRIVE
THROUGH AN EXCESSIVE CURB CUTS
AND ALL OF THESE CAN BE
REGULATED BY FORM RATHER THAN
USE.
I HAPPEN TO LIVE RIGHT OFF
OF PONTIAC SO I SHARE MANY
OF THE OTHER RESIDENTS CONCERNS
ABOUT THE DANGEROUS BEATING AND
A LACK OF SIDEWALKS ALONG
SECTIONS OF PONTIAC AND DUVAN.
BUT I SEE THIS AS ALL THE MORE
REASON TO CATEGORIZE THIS AREA
AS A TRANSITION NODE SO THAT WE
CAN UPGRADE THE INFRASTRUCTURE
TO TRANSFORM THE AREA INTO A
SAFE WALKABLE NEIGHBORHOOD.
IT IS TRUE THAT THE RECENT
DEVELOPMENTS IN THIS AREA DO
NOT FOLLOW A STREET CRED AND
HAVE JUST ONE ENTRY ONTO THE
MAIN STREET.
BUT LOOKING AT THE MAP THERE
ARE MANY POTENTIAL
OPPORTUNITIES FOR NON MOTORIZED
CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN SIDE
STREETS, PARKS AND NATURE AREAS
AND IN ADDITION TO TRAFFIC
CALMING AND IMPROVED BUS
SERVICE ON THE ARTERIALS, THIS
CAN GO A LONG WAY IN
ALLEVIATING TRAFFIC CONCERNS.
PLEASE TRY TO WRAP UP WITH THE
MINIMAL SET OF EDITS NEEDED TO
SATISFY COUNCIL RESOLUTIONS.
MAYBE CONSIDER RENAMING THE
RESIDENTIAL CATEGORY TO A LOW
RISE RESIDENTIAL BUT MOSTLY
PLEASE JUST FOCUS ON GETTING
THE DRAFT PLAN TO A VOTE AS
SOON AS POSSIBLE SO THAT YOU
CAN GET STARTED ON THE WORK
OF ACTUALLY FIXING THE UDC.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
GOOD EVENING TOWN STALBERG.
I LIVE AT ONE TWO ZERO TWO
TRAILER STREET IN THE HEART
OF LOWERTOWN AS YOU ALL KNOW
BECAUSE I'VE SAID A LOT I LIVE
AND HAVE LIVED FOR THE LAST
THIRTY YEARS HERE IN ANN HARBOR
IN GENTLE DENSITY.
THE REASON WE'RE ALL HERE IS
BECAUSE WE ALL WANT TO CREATE
AN EFFECTIVE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
EFFECTIVE BEING THE KEY WORD.
>> I THINK THINGS ARE MISSING
FROM THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
THAT KEEPS IT FROM BEING AN
EFFECTIVE PLAN.
LET'S START WITH AFFORDABLE
HOUSING AND ATTAINABLE HOUSING.
I SEPARATE THOSE TWO BECAUSE A
LOT OF PEOPLE THINK OF THE
DEFINITION OF AFFORDABLE
HOUSING IN TERMS OF AM I
FORMULAS.
SO I ADD INTO THAT ANOTHER
CATEGORY THAT ATTAINABLE
HOUSING IT'S NOT MEETING THE AM
I GOALS.
IT'S NOT MEASURED BY THAT BUT
THAT'S THE PRICE SOMEBODY CAN
AFFORD.
I LIKE HAVING DIVERSE AMENITIES
IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD THAT ARE
WALKABLE.
THEY'RE GREAT BUT IF YOU CAN'T
TANGIBLY IF YOU CAN'T AFFORD A
HOME IN THAT NEIGHBORHOOD YOU
DON'T GET TO HAVE THAT AMENITY
.
THE PLAN THE WAY IT IS NOW
ACCELERATES THE PRICES IN THE
MODERATE SEGMENTS OF THE MARKET
.
I'VE GONE OVER THAT A COUPLE
OF TIMES HERE BEFORE SO WHAT
HAPPENS TO THE PEOPLE HERE WHO
ARE SAYING WHAT THEY'D LOVE TO
HAVE FOR OUR CITY AND WHAT
THEY'D LOVE TO HAVE FOR
THEMSELVES BUT THEY CAN'T
AFFORD TO BUY OR RENT WHAT'S
GOING TO BE BUILT IN THIS TOWN
UNDER THIS PLAN WITHOUT
AFFORDABLE AND ATTAINABLE
HOUSING SUSTAINABILITY AND
EQUITY FALL APART.
IT'S NOT VERY EQUITABLE IF ONLY
PEOPLE WITH A LOT OF MONEY CAN
WALK TO ARGUES FARM STUFF AND
WASHING OUT DAIRY AND JEFFERSON
MARKET IN TERMS
OF SUSTAINABILITY IF THE
HOUSING THAT WE'RE BUILDING IS
ALL EXPENSIVE HOUSING THEN
PEOPLE ARE GOING TO MOVE INTO
NOT THE CITY THEY'RE GOING TO
MOVE TO THE TOWNSHIPS JUST
OUTSIDE OF THE CITY BORDERS
WHERE ALL THE DEVELOPERS THAT
ARE BUILDING INSIDE THE CITY
ARE BUILDING JUST OUTSIDE THE
CITY BORDERS TOLL BROTHERS
PULTE ROBERTSON BROTHERS.
I KNOW I'M MISSING A COUPLE
MORE NORFORK THEY KNOW THEY'RE
PROVIDING HOMES, APARTMENTS FOR
RENT AND FOR PURCHASE
TOWNHOMES, SINGLE FAMILY
HOUSING WHERE IT'S LESS
EXPENSIVE THAN IN ANN ARBOR.
THEY'RE ALREADY BUILDING THEM
NOW THEY'RE GOING TO KEEP
BUILDING THEM BECAUSE THAT'S
WHERE IF WE DON'T DO SOMETHING
DIFFERENT THAN WHAT THIS PLAN
AIMS TO DO, THAT'S WHERE ALL
THESE COMMUTERS ARE GOING TO
MOVE AND COMMUTE INTO TOWN.
WE'RE NOT GOING TO INCREASE THE
DENSITY.
WE'RE NOT GOING TO CREATE
INCREASES.
WE'RE NOT GOING TO BE TO OUR
SUSTAINABILITY GOALS BECAUSE
ALL THE PEOPLE CAN'T AFFORD TO
LIVE HERE ARE JUST GOING TO
MOVE INTO THE TOWNSHIPS AND THE
OTHER COMMUNITIES DEXTEROUSLY
MANCHESTER, WE NEED AN EFFECT.
>> MR. STONE, THANK YOU.
GOOD.
MY NAME IS BRANDY STUART LEVEY.
FORTY TO FORTY MORE EERIE I.
I WORK FOR ANN ARBOR PUBLIC
SCHOOLS AND I WAS TALKING TO A
LOT OF COWORKERS YOUNGER THAN I
AM OR MUCH OLDER THAN I AM DEBT
TAKES OUR BABY THIRTY MINUTES
TO HOUR TO GET TO WORK TO COME
TEACH HERE IN ANN ARBOR AND I
THINK THAT AC NO AID TO CEO TI
WOULD BE A GREAT LIFE CHANGE
FOR A LOT OF PEOPLE INCLUDING
MYSELF SO WE DON'T HAVE TO
TRAVEL SO FAR TO GET TO WORK TO
COME TEACH KIDS EARLY IN THE
MORNING AND TO TRAVEL HOURS TO
GET BACK HOME SO WE'LL WILL BE
VERY NERVOUS RIGHT NOW BUT IT'S
OK WE'RE WE'RE FRIENDLY BUNCH
OK?
I THINK THAT THAT'D BE A GREAT
FIT FOR THOSE THEY WORK HERE
TODAY ANN ARBOR VERSUS
TRAVELING FAR.
YES, I THANK YOU
.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS BEVERLEY FLY BORN
AND RAISED HERE IN ANN ARBOR
OUTSIDE OF TOWN I WAS RAISED ON
CAN EVEN AFFORD IT ANYMORE
QUARTER OF A MILLION TO A
MILLION DOLLAR HOMES.
I'M A SINGLE PARENT IF MY
PARENTS HAD LEFT ME A HOME I
COULDN'T LIVE HERE ANYMORE.
TAXES ARE ASTRONOMICAL
LITTLE
PARCELS.
I DO HAVE TREES.
I DO HAVE A BACKYARD BUT IF
THINGS DON'T CHANGE PEOPLE LIKE
ME AND PEOPLE LIKE MISS STEWART
WHO WORK AT THE SCHOOLS CAN'T
FORWARD HOMES HERE.
YOU CAN'T AFFORD THEM WHO IF
YOU'RE A SINGLE PARENT OR
YOU'RE WORKING FOR THE SCHOOL
SYSTEM YOU MAKE UNDER EIGHTY
ONE THOUSAND DOLLARS A YEAR.
AVALON IS GREAT ALL THE HOUSING
FOR LOW INCOME IS REALLY GREAT
BUT THE WAITING LISTS ARE
TREMENDOUS.
YOU CANNOT GET ON A WAITING
LIST AND OUR HOUSING SECTION
EIGHT YOU'RE ON A WAITING LIST
FOR FIVE SIX YEARS BY THEN YOU
FOUND SOMEWHERE ELSE TO MOVE
AND THEN YOU CAN'T MOVE BACK
BECAUSE THE PRICES ARE STILL
HIGH.
SO IT DOES RUN PEOPLE OUT TO
THE TOWNSHIPS.
IT RUNS THEM IT RUNS THEM OUT
TO PITTSFIELD TOWNSHIP SO THEY
HAVE TO DRIVE IN THE WINTER.
I USED TO WORK FOR WASHTENAW
COUNTY PUBLIC HEALTH.
I HAD TO DRIVE IN THE WINTER
TIME BACK AND FORTH TO GET TO
WORK TO COME TO ANN ARBOR WHICH
IS FIFTEEN MILES IF YOU ARE
HONEST IF YOU'RE ON THE HIGHWAY
IT'S CONGESTED IF YOU'RE
DRIVING THROUGH THE STREETS IS
CONGESTED.
WHEN I LIVED IN IPSI BEFORE I
WAS GRANDFATHERED MY HOME MY
KIDS WENT HERE TO ANN ARBOR
PUBLIC SCHOOLS WHICH IS WHERE I
WENT.
IT WOULD BE VERY NICE IF WE CAN
GET SOME MORE NEIGHBORHOODS
ZONED FOR LOWER INCOME PEOPLE
UNDER A HUNDRED THOUSAND
DOLLARS.
EVERYBODY DOESN'T MAKE THAT
EDUCATED OR NOT.
BECAUSE YOU DON'T HAVE THE JOBS
EVERYBODY DOESN'T MAKE THAT
.
BECAUSE YOU DON'T HAVE THE JOBS
YOU HAVE PEOPLE MOVING FROM
.
HERE BECAUSE THERE ARE NO JOBS
YOU HAVE PEOPLE MOVING FROM
OR YOU HAVE THEM WORKING AT THE
HERE BECAUSE THERE ARE NO JOBS
PLANTS AND THEY STILL CAN'T
OR YOU HAVE THEM WORKING AT THE
AFFORD IT EVEN IF YOU HAVE TWO
PLANTS AND THEY STILL CAN'T
PEOPLE.
AFFORD IT EVEN IF YOU HAVE TWO
SO WHEN YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT
PEOPLE.
BUILDING THESE SKYSCRAPERS AND
SO WHEN YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT
AND LETTING TWO OF THEM RUN ANN
BUILDING THESE SKYSCRAPERS AND
ARBOR, I KNOW IT BRINGS MONEY
AND LETTING TWO OF THEM RUN ANN
BUT IT DOESN'T IT ELIMINATES
ARBOR, I KNOW IT BRINGS MONEY
FAMILY LIFE IN GOOD COMMUNITIES
BUT IT DOESN'T IT ELIMINATES
AND THAT'S IT.
FAMILY LIFE IN GOOD COMMUNITIES
>> THANK YOU.
AND THAT'S IT.
GOOD EVENING.
>> THANK YOU.
CLEVELAND PLANNING
GOOD EVENING.
COMMISSIONERS.
CLEVELAND PLANNING
I'M BRIAN CHAMBERS.
COMMISSIONERS.
TWENTY FIFTEEN.
I'M BRIAN CHAMBERS.
NO WAY THE THIRD WARD
TWENTY FIFTEEN.
INTERESTING DISCUSSIONS.
NO WAY THE THIRD WARD
APPARENTLY WE DON'T HAVE A
INTERESTING DISCUSSIONS.
HOUSING CRISIS BUT I HEAR A LOT
APPARENTLY WE DON'T HAVE A
OF CRISIS IN EVERY STATEMENT
HOUSING CRISIS BUT I HEAR A LOT
THAT WAS MADE THIS EVENING.
OF CRISIS IN EVERY STATEMENT
WHAT IS THE PROBLEM?
THAT WAS MADE THIS EVENING.
THE PROBLEM IS HOUSES ARE
WHAT IS THE PROBLEM?
UNAFFORDABLE FOR NEW BUYERS FOR
THE PROBLEM IS HOUSES ARE
NEW RENTERS AND RENTERS HAVE AN
UNAFFORDABLE FOR NEW BUYERS FOR
ESCALATING PRICE CURVE BECAUSE
NEW RENTERS AND RENTERS HAVE AN
THE RENT CAN ALWAYS GO UP WITH
ESCALATING PRICE CURVE BECAUSE
HOME OWNERSHIP.
THE RENT CAN ALWAYS GO UP WITH
YOU HAVE A FIXED PRICE AND A
HOME OWNERSHIP.
MORTGAGE SO YOU DON'T REFINANCE
YOU HAVE A FIXED PRICE AND A
.
MORTGAGE SO YOU DON'T REFINANCE
YOU CAN KEEP YOUR PRICES STABLE
.
SO WHAT IS THE DO NOTHING
ALTERNATIVE THAT SOME PEOPLE
ARE ASKING US TO CONSIDER?
I DON'T GET IT DO NOTHING.
PEOPLE ARE STILL FORCED OUT.
BANABA STILL HAVE TO COMMUTE
AND STILL HAVE HOUSING STRESS
STORIES WE JUST HEARD ABOUT.
THAT'S THE DO NOTHING OPTION IN
TERMS OF DENSITY AND LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL.
YOU'RE BEING ASKED TO CONSIDER
YOU RESPONDED TO CITY COUNCIL'S
RESOLUTION TO PUT A CAP AT
THREE UNITS AND THREE STORIES.
FOUR STORIES PROVIDES MORE
ATTAINABLE HOUSING.
I'M SURE YOU ALL KNOW THAT
INSTEAD OF A NEW STRUCTURE
BEING BUILT COULD BE A TEAR
DOWN, COULD BE A NEW PARCEL AT
ONE POINT FIVE MILLION FOR SALE
OR TWO MILLION FOR SALE, YOU
COULD HAVE THREE UNITS IN THERE
BUT A THIRD OF THOSE PRICES YOU
COULD HAVE FOUR UNITS AT A
QUARTER OF THOSE PRICES.
NOW ARE THEY AFFORDABLE TO LOW
INCOME?
>> NO, NOBODY'S SAYING THEY'RE
AFFORDABLE TO LOW INCOME.
NO ONE HAS EVER SAID THAT IT'S
BEING USED AS RHETORIC FOR DO
NOTHING.
YOU REALIZE THAT, RIGHT?
YOU'RE BEING ASKED TO CONSIDER
DO NOTHING WITH THAT RHETORIC.
I'M ASKING YOU NOT TO DO THAT.
DEFINE CONTEXT FOR THE FOUR
UNIT QUADRUPLE PLACES IN LOW
RISE RESIDENTIAL.
>> THAT'S WHAT YOU'RE ASKED TO
DO BY COUNCIL BY RIGHT FOR
THREE DEFINE CONTEXT FOR FOUR
WITHIN A QUARTER MILE
OF TRANSIT CONTEXT BY PARKS
CONTEXT BY WORK AREAS CONTEXT
COURTERS CONTEXT YOU CAN DO
THIS AND INCREASE THE HOUSING
STOCK IN ANN ARBOR YOU HAVE
ANOTHER OPTION FRONT OF YOU
LATER TODAY.
I WON'T SPEAK TO IT BECAUSE WE
WERE ASKED NOT TO THE PUBLIC
HEARING BUT TO COME BACK AND
TALK ABOUT OPTIONS FOR LOW
INCOME HOUSING THAT CAN BE
BUILT INTO THE PLAN AND BUILT
INTO THE ORDINANCES.
YOU DON'T HAVE AN EASY TASK.
YOU'RE NOT GOING TO SATISFY
EVERYONE.
DON'T ACCEPT THE DO NOTHING
OPTION.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU JAMES
.
ALL RIGHT.
IS THERE ANYONE ELSE IN
CHAMBERS WHO WOULD LIKE TO
ADDRESS AT THIS TIME SEEING
NONE I DON'T KNOW WHO'S RUNNING
THE ZOOM TONIGHT.
SORRY, DO WE HAVE ONLINE
PARTICIPANTS?
>> WE DO HAVE ONE HAND RAISED.
THANK YOU.
GIVE ME ONE MOMENT
.
>> COLOR ENDING IN THREE TO SIX
YOU CAN NOW ON MUTE AND ADDRESS
THE PLANNING COMMISSION.
>> HELLO MY NAME IS JEFF
CROCKETT.
CAN YOU HEAR ME?
>> WE CAN THANK YOU.
MY NAME IS JEFF CROCKETT AND MY
WIFE AND I LIVE AT FIVE OR SIX
YEARS KINGLET ATTACH YOUR
AGENDA PACARD IS AN EMAIL
RED-LETTER SHELBOURNE IT DATED
JULY 1ST, 2025 SUMMARIZING THE
INPUT OF OVER 400 ANN ARBOR
RESIDENTS REGARDING THE SECOND
DRAFT OF THE COMPREHENSIVE LAND
USE PLAN OF THE TEN SUMMARY
EIGHT EXPRESSED CONCERNS WHILE
ONLY TWO EXPRESSED SUPPORT.
THE AREAS OF CONCERN INCLUDE
MAINTAINING SINGLE FAMILY
ZONING LACK THE PLAN WON'T
CREATE AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
>> THE PLAN DOESN'T ADDRESS
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS TO
DEVELOPMENT FRIENDLY DOESN'T
PROTECT NATURAL FEATURES LITTLE
BIT IN THE PLAN AND A PLAN
DESIGNATE DESIGNATES LAND USE
INCORRECTLY.
WE WOULD LIKE TO ADD FOUR OTHER
AREAS OF CONCERN THEY INCLUDE
INSUFFICIENT AND MISLEADING
LANGUAGE CONCERNING HISTORIC
PRESERVATION.
NO PLAN TO SUPPORT LOCAL
DOWNTOWN BUSINESSES, NO PLAN TO
ADDRESS THE INCREASED TRAFFIC
CONGESTION DOWNTOWN THAT WILL
RESULT FROM INCREASED DENSITY
AND CONFUSING BIKE LANES AND NO
PLAN TO ADDRESS HANDICAPPED
PARKING IN THE DOWNTOWN AREA IF
THESE TWELVE CONCERNS ARE NOT
ADDRESSED IN THE THIRD DRAFT
OF THE COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE
PLAN AND THE PLAN ABSOLUTELY
NEEDS TO BE PAUSED UNTIL THEY
ARE ADDRESSED REGARDING THE
RECENT LOSS MORE DOWNTOWN
BUSINESSES INCLUDING THE
DOWNTOWN HOME AND GARDEN.
>> A LOT OF CONCERN ABOUT THAT
HERE IS REALLY BEEN A LACK
OF ENGAGEMENT WITH DOWNTOWN
BUSINESSES BY THE CITY
GOVERNMENT WHICH IS VERY
DISTURBING.
PLANS ARE BEING MADE FOR HIS
DEVELOPMENT AND THE CLAIMS LIKE
THAT WILL DISRUPT PARKING
DOWNTOWN FOR AN INDETERMINATE
AMOUNT OF TIME.
THAT COMBINED WITH INCREASED
TRAFFIC CONGESTION IN THE AREA
EASILY RESULTED IN THE CLOSING
OF MORE DOWNTOWN BUSINESSES.
THE CITY GOVERNMENT NEEDS TO
REACH OUT TO THE DOWNTOWN
BUSINESSES TO DETERMINE WHAT
EFFECT CLOSING QUEENSLAND WILL
HAVE AND WHAT CAN BE DONE TO
MITIGATE THE IMPACT BEFORE
SIGNING A SALES AGREEMENT WITH
THE DEVELOPER REGARDING THE
ASSIGNMENT SAME TRANSITION
DISTRICTS THEY SHOULD BE ALONG
CORRIDORS ONLY AND NOT EXTENDED
TO NEIGHBORS AND FINALLY WE
OFFERED THE FOLLOWING WORDING
FOR THE HISTORIC PRESERVATION
STATEMENT ON PAGE 60 THAT
RECOGNIZES THE IMPORTANCE
OF HISTORIC PRESERVATION THAT
MOST INEBRIATES VALUE HISTORIC
DISTRICT BOUNDARIES WILL BE
MAINTAINED AND DEVELOPMENT WILL
CONTINUE TO ADHERE TO THE
EXISTING STANDARDS AND DESIGN
GUIDELINES APPROVED BY THE
HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION
ASSISTS EXISTING HISTORIC
DISTRICTS ARE LEGALLY
PROTECTED.
THE PURPOSE OF PRESERVING THE
CITY'S BUILDINGS AND PLACES
OF CULTURAL AND HISTORICAL
SIGNIFICANCE FOR FUTURE
GENERATIONS AND OUTCOME
OF DECADES OF LEGISLATIVE
ACTION BY THE CITY TO LEARN
MORE ABOUT HISTORICAL THANK YOU
MR ABBOTT'S PAST TAKE THIS MARK
TO ANN ARBOR DISTRICT LIBRARY
WEBSITE.
THANK YOU ENABLERS BISON'S YOUR
THANK YOU FOR CONSIDERATION
HUI'S VSQUEZ.
>> YOU MAY NOW UNMUTED AND
ADDRESS THE PLANNING COMMISSION
.
THANK YOU AND GREETINGS TO
EVERYBODY.
SORRY I COULDN'T BE THERE WITH
YOU ALL TONIGHT TO BE THERE IN
PERSON BUT I LIVE AT NINE ZERO
NINE MARTIN DRIVE IN UPPER
LOWER TOWN AND JUST WANTED TO
REITERATE PREVIOUS POSITIONS
.
PLEASE DO NOT ADD NEW
RESTRICTIONS TO THE RESIDENTIAL
CATEGORY.
I'M ASKING THE COMMISSION TO
REJECT THAT PROPOSAL AND TO NOT
DOWNGRADE TRANSITION AREAS.
IN FACT I THINK WE NEED TO
EXPAND TRANSITION ZONES
THROUGHOUT THE CITY AND INTO
NEIGHBORHOODS AND ALSO YOU
KNOW, I'D LIKE TO ASK THE
QUESTION WHERE'S WHERE'S MY
BODEGA?
WHERE'S MY CORNER STORE?
WHERE'S MY JEFFERSON MARKET?
I'M URGING YOU TO COME UP WITH
WELL TO CONTINUE TO WORK ON THE
PLAN AND COME UP WITH
PROVISIONS SUCH AS THAT TO
WHERE IT MAKES IT EASIER FOR
PEOPLE TO WALK IN THEIR
NEIGHBORHOODS NOT TO HAVE TO
DRIVE.
>> AND ALSO JUST TO CONCLUDE I
I REALLY FIND IT RICH WHEN
THOSE WHO LIVE COMFORTABLY IN
YOU KNOW, HALF A MILLION
DOLLARS SEVEN HUNDRED AND FIFTY
THOUSAND DOLLAR OR MILLION
DOLLAR PLUS HOMES THEY LIVE
COMFORTABLY IN THEM.
COME AND TALK TO US AND TRY AND
TELL US THAT THERE IS NO
HOUSING CRISIS.
THERE IS A HOUSING CRISIS AND
THERE IS AN AFFORDABILITY
CRISIS.
AND THE OTHER QUESTION I WOULD
LIKE TO ASK TO WRAP THIS UP AND
I KNOW I'VE ASKED THIS QUESTION
BEFORE IN FRONT OF THE
COMMISSION AND IN FRONT
OF COUNSEL HOW DOES NOT
BUILDING HOUSING OF ALL KINDS
HOW DOES THAT LOWER RENTS?
HOW DOES THAT LOWER THE COST
OF HOUSING?
AND I KNOW I WILL NEVER GET AN
ANSWER TO THAT BECAUSE THERE IS
NO ANSWER TO THAT.
SO PLEASE CONTINUE YOUR WORK.
YOU YOU'RE DOING A GREAT JOB,
DO NOT YOU?
THERE'S NO NEED TO STOP THE
PROCESS RIGHT NOW AND WE NEED
TO GET THE PLAN COMPLETE AND
BEFORE COUNCIL AS SOON AS WE
POSSIBLY CAN.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR YOUR
TIME.
THANK YOU.
>> COLOR THE PHONE NUMBER
ENDING AND SIX FOUR FOR YOU NOW
AND AND ADDRESS A PLANNING
COMMISSION
.
MY NAME IS CATHY BORITH AND I
LIVE AT ONE SEVEN TO SIX
CHARLTON IN THE FIFTH WARD.
A NEIGHBOR'S YARD SIGN SAYS
BILLIONAIRES HANDS OFF AMERICA
BUT HOW TO KEEP THE
BILLIONAIRES OUT?
PERHAPS THE BEST WAY IS NOT TO
EXPLICITLY INVITE THEM IN.
I BELIEVE THAT THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND PLAN AS
CURRENTLY DRAFTED WITH ITS
GREAT LOOSENING OF THE RULES
THAT WE HAVE FOR LIVABILITY
WILL OPEN THE DOOR TO CORPORATE
REDEVELOPMENT OF OUR CITY.
ONE COMMENTER AT A PAST
PLANNING COMMISSION MEETING
ASKED WHO WILL OWN ANN ARBOR IF
ALL OF THESE NEW UNITS PROPOSED
IN THE CLUB ARE BUILT OXFORD
THEN MCKINLEY?
WELL, PROBABLY OR POSSIBLY REAL
ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUSTS FROM
AROUND THE COUNTRY AND AROUND
THE WORLD.
WILL THESE NEW CORPORATE OWNERS
OF OUR CITIES NEW DENSE HOUSING
FREE RENTERS BETTER THAN OUR
CURRENT LANDLORDS?
WILL ANYTHING CONSTRAIN
BETTER
LANDLORDS, BUT THEY WILL
CERTAINLY BE FAR LESS PLEASANT
IN OUR COMMUNITY TO BE HELD
ACCOUNTABLE FOR ANYTHING THEY
DO.
CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS SAY THERE
WERE ELECTED ON THE ISSUE
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
BUT WHEN WE HAVE COMPLAINED
THAT CERTAIN NEWLY APPROVED
LARGE PROJECTS CONTAIN NO
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AT ALL.
CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS QUICKLY
JUMPED TO THE ASSERTION THAT
ANIRBAN NEEDS HOUSING AT ALL
PRICE POINT.
PERHAPS THESE THE SAME CITY
COUNCIL MEMBERS WHO VOTED DOWN
AN AMENDMENT TO THE D.C. ONE
REZONING THAT WOULD HAVE
REQUIRED MORE THAN THE MINIMAL
AMOUNT OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING
GREENSPACE OR INFRASTRUCTURE
ENHANCEMENTS THAT OUR CITY
ALREADY MANDATES FROM
DEVELOPERS.
IT SHOULD BE POINTED OUT THAT
HOUSING AT ALL PRICE POINTS IS
QUITE DIFFERENT FROM THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING FOR LOCAL
WORKERS THAT WE ALL WANT
HOUSING AT ALL PRICE POINTS
SEEMS TO BE CODE FOR LUXURY
HOUSING WHICH IS HOUSING FOR
MILLIONAIRES AND BILLIONAIRES.
I FEEL LIKE IN OUR HISTORY IS
BEING ERASED ALL BUILDINGS WITH
SO MUCH TO OFFER AND QUALITY
MATERIALS AND CHARACTER ARE
BEING DESTROYED TO BUILD
SOMETHING MUCH BIGGER AND
TALLER AND I'M CONNECTED TO AN
ARBOR'S PATH.
THIS IS A SHAME AND IT WILL NOT
LEAD TO MORE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
BUT JUST TO ASSIST SYSTEMATIC
DESTRUCTION OF THE RELATIVELY
AFFORDABLE UNITS THAT WE
PRESENTLY DO HAVE IN OLD HOUSES
AND OLD BUILDINGS.
BUT OF COURSE THESE OLD HOUSES
AND OLD BUILDINGS WILL BE
KNOCKED DOWN TO MAKE WAY FOR
THE NEW DENSE LOW RISE LIKE YOU
AND 12 HOURS ARE LIKE THANK
YOU.
THANK YOU FOR LISTENING
.
>> WE HAVE NO OTHER HANDS
RAISED AT THIS TIME SEEING NO
OTHER ONLINE PARTICIPANTS I
WILL CLOSE THE PUBLIC COMMENT
AND MOVE US TO ITEM NUMBER
SEVEN WHICH IS COMMUNICATION
FROM COMMISSIONERS.
>> ARE THERE ANY
SEEING?
NONE.
I WILL MOVE US TO AGENDA ITEM
NUMBER EIGHT PUBLIC HEARINGS
SCHEDULED FOR THE NEXT BUSINESS
MEETING PLANNER THATCHER.
>> THERE ARE NO PUBLIC HEARINGS
SCHEDULED FOR SEPTEMBER 3RD
CITY PLANNING COMMITTEE
MEETING.
BUT I DO WANT TO POINT OUT THAT
THE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN
WILL BE VOTED ON AT THAT
MEETING.
IT WAS NOT REQUIRED TO BE
NOTICED FOR A HEARING.
>> THANK YOU AND THAT TAKES US
TO UNFINISHED BUSINESS WHICH
THERE IS NONE AND WITH THE
COMMISSION'S CONSENT I'D LIKE
TO TAKE A FIVE MINUTE RECESS
BEFORE WE GET INTO THE REGULAR
BUSINESS.
OK, WE ARE RECESS FOR FIVE
MINUTES.
>> WE WILL RETURN AT SEVEN
SEVEN
.
>> WE WILL RESUME OUR REGULAR
MEETING.
>> WE WILL START WITH AGENDA
ITEM NUMBER TEN A EIGHT FOUR
ONE BROADWAY STREET.
WE WILL FIRST START BY HEARING
FROM THE PETITIONER.
YOU ALL CAN MAKE YOUR WAY TO
THE PODIUM THEN THE AFTER THE
PETITIONERS PRESENTATION WE
WILL HAVE A STAFF PRESENTATION
BY PLANNER THATCHER.
THEN WE WILL HAVE A DEDICATED
PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD AND THEN
AFTER THE PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD
THE COMMISSION WILL HAVE ITS
DELIBERATION.
SO WELCOME.
I THINK YOU HAVE TEN MINUTES TO
ADDRESS US SO THANK YOU
COMMISSION AND WE'LL DO OUR
VERY BEST NOT TO USE ALL
OF THAT TIME.
MY NAME IS DAVID DORITA.
I'M PRINCIPAL OF THE ROXBURY
GROUP.
WE ARE HAVE BEEN AND ALWAYS
WILL BE THE DEVELOPERS
OF BROADWAY PARK WEST WHICH IS
THE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT THAT
THIS PARTICULAR ITEM IS LOCATED
IN.
I WANTED TO JUST GIVE A FEW
MINUTES OF CONTEXT BEFORE I
TURNED OVER TO MIKE TO COSTER
FROM STANTON WHO WILL TAKE YOU
THROUGH THE SPECIFICS OF OF OUR
PROPOSED PLAN AMENDMENT.
THE LAST TIME I WAS BEFORE THIS
BODY WAS IN 2009 AND I BELIEVE
IT WAS VIRTUAL BUT SPENT MORE
THAN A FEW HOURS IN HERE ON THE
OVERALL PLAN FOR BROADWAY PARK
WEST WHICH WE'RE VERY DELIGHTED
TO BE MOVING FORWARD ON NOW AND
AND WORKING VERY DILIGENTLY TO
OPEN THE PUBLIC SPACE COMPONENT
OF IN SEPTEMBER OF THIS YEAR TO
THE PUBLIC WELL WELL AHEAD
OF THE REQUIRED OPENING OF THAT
PUBLIC SPACE BEFORE THE FIRST
RESIDENTIAL OR HOSPITALITY
PROPERTY OPENS.
SO WE'RE ADVANCING ON THAT
SCORE.
BUT WHAT I WANTED TO GIVE YOU
WAS CONTEXT FOR THIS AT THE
TIME OF THE DEVELOPMENT
AGREEMENT AND THE WORK WE DID
WITH THIS BODY AND YOUR
PREDECESSORS AS WELL AS CITY
COUNCIL, THERE WERE MANY, MANY
COMPLICATED THINGS WE WERE
TRYING TO ACCOMPLISH ON A SITE
THAT HAD BEEN ESSENTIALLY SAWED
OFF FROM THE ENTIRE CITY FOR
OVER 100 YEARS DEEPLY
CONTAMINATED, INACCESSIBLE AND
INDUSTRIA WE ZONED AND WHILE WE
WERE DEALING WITH THE DETAILS
OF TURNING OVER HALF OF THIS
PROPERTY OVER TO PUBLIC USE AND
TRYING TO AVOID AN ELEVATE THE
BUILT ENVIRONMENT TO THE 500
YEAR FLOOD EVENT AND DEALING
WITH SUSTAINABILITY ACROSS THIS
PROJECT WE DECIDED AT THAT TIME
THAT IT WASN'T ENTIRELY CLEAR
GIVEN THE DENSITY RESTRICTIONS
ON THE SITE WHETHER WHETHER
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PERSAY COULD
BE DEVELOPED ON THE SITE OR
WHETHER THE BEST ROUTE WAS TO
MAKE A CONTRIBUTION TO THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND
AND WE WANTED THE OPTION TO DO
EITHER OR AND THE DEVELOPMENT
AGREEMENT ULTIMATELY GAVE US
THE OPTION TO DO EITHER OR.
BUT WE NEED TO TAKE OUR BREATH
AND FIGURE OUT A LOT OF VERY
COMPLICATED ISSUES FOR THOSE
WHO AREN'T FAMILIAR WITH OUR
EXPERT GROUP, WE ARE DEEPLY
INVOLVED IN AFFORDABLE HOUSING
IN THE CITY OF DETROIT WHERE WE
ARE BASED AND WE WERE BASED
THEN WE ACTUALLY HAVE AN NRA
OFFICE NOW BUT WE WE HAVE A
STEEP COMMITMENT TO AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
WE REALLY JUST DIDN'T KNOW AT
THE TIME WHETHER IT WAS GOING
TO BE POSSIBLE TO TO ACHIEVE
THAT ON THE SITE GIVEN SOME
OF THE THINGS WE WERE TRYING TO
ACHIEVE WITH THE FULLNESS
OF TIME WE CONCLUDED THAT WE
WANTED TO PURSUE THE OPTION
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND WE
WANTED TO IDENTIFY A LOCATION
TO DO THAT ON THE SITE THAT
WOULD HAVE MINIMAL PLANNING
IMPACTS TO THE SITE OVERALL.
AND WORKING WITH STANTON WE
IDENTIFIED A LOCATION THAT HAD
BEEN PREVIOUSLY DESIGNATED
SIMPLY FOR RETAIL CLOSE ON THE
SAME SIDE OF THE STREET AS THE
OTHER RESIDENTIAL THAT WAS
ALREADY BEING DEVELOPED FOR
SALE RESIDENTIAL AND AND
CONCLUDED THAT REALLY GOING
ABOVE THAT WAS THE RIGHT ANSWER
TO INCREASE DENSITY INCREASED
AND NOT LARGE SCALE.
I DON'T WANT TO OVERBLOW THIS.
I'VE BEEN LISTENING TO THE
PUBLIC HERE FOR THE LAST HOUR
AND A HALF AND WE HAVE AN
AFFORDABILITY CRISIS IN THIS
TOWN.
I'M NOT SUGGESTING FOR A MINUTE
THAT THE AMOUNT OF HOUSING THAT
WE'RE GOING TO PROVIDE HERE IS
GOING TO MEANINGFULLY ADDRESS
THAT THAT CRISIS.
BUT WE DO BELIEVE IT IS IT IS
VALUABLE AFFORDABLE WORKFORCE
HOUSING IN AT THE SITE AND WE
WANT TO BRING IT TO THE SITE.
AND SO WITH THAT I'M GOING TO
TURN IT OVER TO MIKE.
I'M MORE THAN HAPPY TO ANSWER
ANY QUESTIONS THAT MIGHT COME
UP AFTER THAT.
>> THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING, COMMISSIONER.
MY NAME IS MIKE CASTER,
ARCHITECT WITH SANTIC.
I'LL WALK THROUGH THE
PARTICULARS OF THE PLAN THAT
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT HERE.
HERE'S A VIEW OF THE OVERALL
DEVELOPMENT FOR THOSE WHO ARE
FAMILIAR WITH THE SITE.
WE'RE ADJACENT TO THE GREEN
RIVER, AN OLD PARCEL YOU CAN
SEE THE OVERALL MASTER PLAN
DEVELOPMENT AS YOU CAN SEE HERE
OUTLINED NEXT THE RAILROAD
TRACKS.
THIS IS A PLAN VIEW OF THAT
SAME DEVELOPMENT AS YOU CAN SEE
HERE WE'RE LOOKING NORTH IN
YELLOW IS THE FOR SALE CONDO
DEVELOPMENT AND CIRCLED THERE
IN ORANGE IS THE PROPOSED FOUR
STOREY AFFORDABLE HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT THAT WE ARE
PROPOSING TO CHANGE TO AMEND
THE ZONING ORDINANCE FOR A
LITTLE MORE DETAIL.
THE GROUND FLOOR HERE WOULD SIT
ON THE SAME FLOOR PLATE FOR
PLATE OF THE OLD RETAIL FLOOR
AND THEN GO UP FROM THERE.
WE HAVE AFFORDABLE HOUSING ON
THE GROUND FOR POTENTIAL RETAIL
OR HOUSING ON THE CORNER THERE
IN GREEN WE'RE PROPOSING
SEVENTEEN UNITS OUT OF THE
TWENTY TWO I'M SORRY EIGHTEEN
UNITS OF THE TWENTY TWO TO BE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN THIS
PARTICULAR AREA.
THEN WE GO UP TO THE TYPICAL
FLOOR SO AS YOU CAN SEE HERE
THIS IS THE FIRST FLOOR AGAIN
WITH THE POTENTIAL RETAIL OR
RESIDENTIAL ON THE GROUND FLOOR
ON THE CORNER PLUS THE OTHER
UNITS ALONG THERE AND THE
TYPICAL FLOOR ON TWO FLOORS
TWO, THREE AND FOUR WHERE WE
HAVE BOTH ONE AND TWO BEDROOM
UNITS IN THIS PARTICULAR
FACILITY.
THIS IS A RENDERING THAT'S BEEN
SHOWN TO COUNCIL AND TO THE
PUBLIC LARGE ABOUT THE
CHARACTER OF THE ARCHITECTURE
IN THIS AREA.
THESE ARE THE CONDO BUILDINGS.
THIS IS THE TYPE
OF ARCHITECTURE THAT WE'RE
TALKING MATERIALS THAT WILL BE
USING.
YOU CAN SEE A LOT OF BRICK
DURABLE WELL WORN MATERIALS.
WE'RE PROPOSING THE SAME
PALETTE OF MATERIALS FOR THIS
AFFORDABLE HOUSING MATERIAL
SUITABLE FOR THIS AFFORDABLE
HOUSING PROJECT SO IT WILL
BLEND IN WITH THE REST OF THE
DEVELOPMENT AND BE A PART
OF THE COMMUNITY THAT WE'RE
TRYING TO CREATE HERE WITH ALL
THE HOUSING RETAIL AND THE
ELEVEN ACRE PUBLIC SPACE WE'RE
BUILDING BY THE RIVER.
SO WITH THAT I THINK WE CAN
TAKE QUESTIONS.
>> WE'LL HAVE OUR STAFF
PRESENTATION, THE PUBLIC
COMMENT AND THEN WE WILL CALL
YOU BACK FOR QUESTIONS.
THANK YOU SO MUCH PLANNER
THATCHER SET YOUR MIKES NOT ON.
>> I'M SORRY.
SORRY.
JULIA SHAKE PUT TOGETHER THE
STAFF REPORT FOR THIS PROJECT
AND I DON'T HAVE A LOT TO ADD
TO THE STAFF REPORT.
I JUST WANT TO POINT OUT THAT
THE THE ADDITIONAL TWENTY TWO
UNITS BRINGS THEM TO ONE
HUNDRED AND EIGHTEEN
FIFTEEN
PERCENT OF ONE HUNDRED AND
EIGHTEEN IS EIGHTEEN UNITS SO
THAT ALL CHECKS OUT
AND WHAT
THEY'RE PROPOSING IS IN KEEPING
WITH THE PUTI ZONING
REGULATIONS SPECIFIC TO THE
SITE.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH.
THAT BRINGS US TO AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR US TO HEAR FROM
THE PUBLIC.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK UP TO
THREE MINUTES ON THE PROPOSED
EIGHT FORTY ONE BROADWAY STREET
SITE PLAN.
WE'LL FIRST HEAR FROM THOSE
OF YOU WHO ARE PRESENT IN THE
CHAMBERS THEN ANY REMOTE
PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK REMOTELY
PRESS STAR NINE IF ON PHONE OR
USE THE RACE HAND FEATURE IN
ZOOM FOR PHONE ACCESS DIAL
EIGHT SEVEN SEVEN EIGHT FIVE
THREE ONE FIVE TO FOUR SEVEN
AND INTERMEETING ID NINE SEVEN
SEVEN SIX SIX THREE FOUR ONE
TWO TWO SIX CITY STAFF WILL
IDENTIFY CALLERS BY THE LAST
THREE DIGITS OF THEIR PHONE
NUMBER OR BY NAME.
>> IF ON ZOOM YOU WILL HEAR AN
ANNOUNCEMENT WHEN IT'S YOUR
TURN TO SPEAK PLEASE MOVE TO A
QUIET AREA AND MUTE ANY
BACKGROUND NOISE FOR ALL
PARTICIPANTS SPEAKING EITHER IN
THE CHAMBER OR ON ZOOME PLEASE
STATE YOUR NAME AND YOUR
ADDRESS AT THE BEGINNING
OF YOUR COMMENTS.
IS THERE ANYONE IN THE CHAMBER
WHO WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
TIME?
>> MR STOLLBERG YES.
THANK YOU TOM STALBERG AGAIN
ONE TWO ZERO TWO TRAVIS STREET
AND LOWERTOWN THIS IS MY
NEIGHBORHOOD.
I IN SUPPORT OF THIS
APPLICATION I WAS IN SUPPORT
OF THIS PROJECT BEFORE THE PD
PROVIDING AFFORDABLE HOUSING
BENEFITS.
THEY WANT TO CHANGE THE WAY
THEY'RE PROVIDED BUT THEY'RE
PROVIDING AND I THINK IT'S
WONDERFUL TO HAVE THOSE UNITS
ON SITE AND THIS LOOKS LIKE A
GREAT SOLUTION FOR DOING SO.
I ALSO WANT TO PROVIDE SOME
CONTEXT FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING
PARTICULARLY IN THAT AREA OVER
THE PAST SEVERAL YEARS.
IF WE GO BACK TO LATE TWENTY
SEVENTEEN WE HAD MORNINGSIDE
LOWERTOWN PROPOSAL AND THAT
THAT WAS PROBLEMATIC.
LET'S SAY IT'S A PUDI IN
DISGUISE CHEATED THE CITY OUT
OF NINETY THREE UNITS
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
>> THE VANGUARD HOTEL WAS
APPROVED AS A D SHORTLY AFTER
THAT WE GOT A HALF MILLION
DOLLARS TO THE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING FUND FROM THAT PROJECT
AND THAT WAS GOOD.
THERE WAS A SMALL PROJECT AT
THE BROADWAY BRIDGE REALLY
CLOSE TO THIS THE GARNET IT'S
TEN CONDOS THAT CONTRIBUTED
NINETY THOUSAND TO THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING FUND.
A LITTLE BIT OF A FIGHT TO GET
THAT BUT IT WAS APPROPRIATE THE
ORIGINAL APPLICATION WAS NOT
APPROPRIATE AND THE DEVELOPER
WAS PRETTY WILLING TO SWITCH
AND SO WE GOT THAT AFFORDABLE
HOUSING BENEFIT THERE GO
FORWARD A LITTLE BIT IN TIME
AND WE HAD FORAMS SOUTHTOWN
PROJECT WHICH WAS
INAPPROPRIATELY APPROVED THAT
COST US OVER THIRTY UNITS
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING THE CORE
SPACES I'M WILLIAMS RIGHT NOW
THAT WAS LEGALLY APPROVED BUT
WE CHANGED THE LAW JUST BEFORE
THEIR PROMISE TO START WORK.
I'M SORRY ARE YOU MAKING
COMMENTS ABOUT EIGHT FORTY ONE
THIS IS THE CONTEXT
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND PEDS
AND OTHER PROJECTS.
YES THE NO BUT YOU'RE NOT
TALKING ABOUT EIGHT FORTY ONE
BROADWAY MENTIONED THAT THEY
WERE ON MY LIST.
I'M GOING TO GET TO THAT OK
COULD YOU GET TO THAT PLEASE BY
CHANGING THE LAW TO ELIMINATE
THE PREMIUM THAT COST OVER
THIRTY UNITS OF AFFORDABLE
HOUSING BROADWAY PARK WEST HERE
APPROPRIATELY APPROVED AS A PD
WE GET AFFORDABLE HOUSING WITH
THAT.
SO I'M GIVING YOU THE CONTEXT
OF SOME DEVELOPMENTS ARE
DELIVERING WHAT WE NEED THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN WITH THE
MILLAGE FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING
EVEN IF WE BUILD A COUPLE
OF THOUSAND A YEAR WE'RE
GETTING A TRICKLE.
WE'RE GETTING LESS THAN THIS.
THIS IS GREAT TO HAVE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS BUILT
BUILT ON SITE BY THE
DEVELOPERS.
THAT'S WHERE I WAS AT THIS.
>> THANK YOU.
GREAT.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
TRICIA HACKNEY AND I LIVE IN
LOWERTOWN TOO.
I LIVE IN THE CROSSINGS OF ANN
ARBOR.
I HAD A QUESTION FOR THEM THIS
THIS PROJECT SOUNDS VERY
EXCITING.
I JUST HAVE ONE QUESTION.
YOU'RE RIGHT BELOW THE BROADWAY
BRIDGE, RIGHT?
THAT THAT'S THIS PROJECT.
>> OK, ARE YOU WORRIED ABOUT
FLOODING?
I'M SURE YOU'VE THOUGHT OF IT
IN ADVANCE.
THAT'S MY ONLY BECAUSE YOU'RE
RIGHT ON MY WALKING YOU CAN
ADDRESS YOUR QUESTION TO US AND
THEN WE CAN ADDRESS IT TO THE
PARTITION SO I'LL SIT DOWN AND
THEY CAN TALK.
>> OK, SO YOUR QUESTION I'M
SORRY.
>> I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT WE GOT IT CORRECTLY.
QUESTION IS FLOODING YOU GOT IT
OK COMMISSIONER DISH HAS TO AND
WE'LL ASK WHEN IT'S OUR TURN TO
TALK TO THE PETITIONER.
THANK YOU MR. MAURO.
THANK YOU COUNSEL COMMISSIONER
.
SO I DON'T KNOW IF I HEARD THIS
RIGHT.
I LOVE THE FLEXIBILITY
OF HAVING HOUSING OR RETAIL IN
A SPACE.
I'M NOT SURE IF THAT'S LIKE THE
ACTUAL BUILT IN BUILT
ENVIRONMENT OR JUST TO PLAN.
THE REASON IS I THINK THERE'S A
LOT OF HYPE COMING TO AN AREA
THAT GROUND FULL OF RETAIL AND
I KNOW IT'S TOUGH TO RENT BUT I
THINK WE SHOULD DO IT ANYWAYS.
MY OTHER PRIMARY CONCERN AGAIN
IF YOU THINK IT'S GERMANE THE
DISCUSSION IS I'M REALLY
CURIOUS WHAT THE PRICE POINTS
ARE OVERALL IN THE BROADWAY
WEST DEVELOPMENT.
WHAT ARE THE PRICE POINTS?
HOW MUCH OF EACH AND THEN HOW
DOES THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING FIT
INTO THAT?
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU MR.
HELLO MY NAME IS SARAH
LAWRENCE.
I'M THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
OF THE ANN ARBOR COMMUNITY LAND
TRUST.
I'D LIKE TO SPEAK IN SUPPORT
OF THIS PROJECT.
I WAS VERY PLEASED TO SEE THIS
PLAN IN THE AGENDA.
I THINK THE RENDERINGS ARE
BEAUTIFUL.
I THINK IT'S EXCITING TO HAVE
THESE ADDITIONAL AFFORDABLE
UNITS.
I WOULD LOVE TO SEE A FEW MORE
STORIES ON THIS.
THANK YOU.
IS THERE ANYONE ELSE PRESENT IN
THE CHAMBERS, MR. GARBER THANK
YOU.
>> CHAIR WHICH KEN GARBER
TWENTY EIGHT HAVE HELD COURT
ABOUT THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
ACT.
>> MR. HATCHER MENTIONED THE
FIFTEEN PERCENT OF ALL UNITS
REQUIRED UNDER THE DIRECT
THEY'RE PROVIDING FIFTEEN POINT
THREE PERCENT BY MY
CALCULATIONS.
BUT WHAT WASN'T MENTIONED IS
THAT THE CITY'S BROWNFIELD
POLICY ALSO REQUIRES 15 PERCENT
AFFORDABLE UNITS IF THERE ARE
NOT ENVIRONMENTAL COSTS THAT
ARE BEING REIMBURSED AS IN THIS
CASE IN THIS CASE THERE'S OVER
11 MILLION DOLLARS IN NON
ENVIRONMENTAL COSTS THAT ARE
BEING THE INVERSE.
SO YOU HAVE TO SEPARATE
REQUIREMENT FOR 15 PERCENT
AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
>> OBVIOUSLY APPARENTLY THEY'RE
NOT ADDITIVE AND YOU CAN'T
REQUIRE IN ADDITION TO THESE
REQUIREMENTS.
BUT I THINK I WOULD ASK IF IT
WERE ME I WOULD ASK ROXBURY TO
MAKE THE ENTIRE TWENTY TWO UNIT
BUILDING AFFORDABLE NOT JUST 18
UNITS.
THEY'RE DOING THE BARE MINIMUM
WHEN IN FACT THERE ARE TWO
SEPARATE CITY POLICIES THAT
REQUIRE 15 PERCENT AND THEY'RE
BOTH APPLIED TO THIS DEVELOPER
SO THE OTHER FACTOR THAT I
THINK WOULD JUSTIFY GOING ALL
AFFORDABLE IN THIS BUILDING IS
THE FACT THAT THIS DEVELOPMENT
HAS RECEIVED AN EXTENSIVE
AMOUNT OF PUBLIC SUPPORT,
TAXPAYER SUPPORT, A TWENTY
MILLION DOLLAR EARMARK BY THE
STATE OF MICHIGAN, A HALF
MILLION DOLLAR GRANT BY EGLE A
MILLION DOLLAR GRANT BY THE MDC
FOR THE PAVILION.
THE AFOREMENTIONED SEVENTEEN
POINT THREE MILLION DOLLAR
BROWNFIELD PLAN WHICH MOST
OF IT A MAJORITY OF THAT WILL
BE FOR NOT ENVIRONMENTAL SITE
DEVELOPMENT THAT INCLUDING
REIMBURSEMENT FOR INTEREST ON
CONSTRUCTION LOANS.
IN OTHER WORDS, THIS IS A
HEAVILY SUBSIDIZED, PUBLICLY
SUBSIDIZED PROJECT AND WHILE IT
DOES BRING A LOT OF PUBLIC
BENEFIT, THERE'S GOING TO BE
CLEANUP OF THIS HIGHLY
CONTAMINATED SITE ALONG HERE
ALONG THE HERE ON RIVER ONE
HUNDRED EIGHTEEN UNITS
OF HOUSING, SOME RETAIL, A NINE
STORY HOTEL WHICH WAS
CONTROVERSIAL AT THE TIME THAT
YOU SAW IT IN TWENTY TWENTY BUT
WAS APPROVED AT THAT TIME.
>> I THINK WE SHOULD ASK FOR
MORE AFFORDABLE HOUSING HERE.
THE WHOLE BUILDING.
THE OTHER PROBLEM I HAVE WITH
THIS DEVELOPMENT IS THAT THE
HOTEL, THE CONDOS, THE PAVILION
THEY'RE ALL GOING TO BE HERE
WITH NATURAL GAS AS FAR AS I
KNOW THE APARTMENTS THAT YOU'RE
UNDER ON YOUR TABLE TONIGHT I
DON'T KNOW.
THERE WAS TALK ABOUT
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE CITY
COUNCIL MEETING ON THE 21ST
OF JULY IF IT DOES GO ALL
ELECTRIC I WOULD ASK THAT THIS
BE ADDED TO THE PUDI
REGULATIONS IF THE DEVELOPER IS
COMMITTED TO THIS, THEY'LL
AGREE TO THAT.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU, MR. GARBER.
IS THERE ANYONE ELSE PRESENT
WHO WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
TIME SEEING NONE DO WE HAVE
PARTICIPANTS WHO WOULD LIKE TO
SPEAK DO LUIS VASQUEZ YOU CAN
NOW ON MUTE AND ADDRESS ME
PLANNING COMMISSION.
>> YES, THANK YOU.
LUIS VASQUEZ NINE ZERO NINE
BARTON DRIVE ALSO ON A HOME AT
FOURTEEN FORTY TWO PONTIAC
TRAIL.
SO YES, THIS IS MY NEIGHBORHOOD
TO I'M PLEASED TO SEE THAT MORE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING WILL BE
OFFERED IN THIS PROJECT.
THAT'S GOOD TO SEE.
I HAD A QUESTION IS IS ANY
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY BEING BEING
BUILT INTO THIS PROJECT?
THAT'S ONE QUESTION THAT I HAD.
THE OTHER QUESTION ACTUALLY
IT'S JUST A COMMENT WHAT SARAH
LAWRENCE JUST SAID ABOUT THIS
COULD BE A TALLER DEVELOPMENT
AND EVEN MORE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING COULD BE ADDED TO THIS
PROJECT.
WHY NOT?
LET'S LET'S MAXIMIZE OUR
OPPORTUNITIES HERE.
>> YOU KNOW, IT'S GREAT THAT
THE DEVELOPERS DOING US ADDING
AFFORDABLE HOUSING BUT THERE
COULD BE MORE.
>> SO THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME.
THANK YOU
, ALEX LOWE.
>> YOU CAN NOW AND YOU CAN
ADJUST THE PLANNING COMMISSION
ALISSA'S AXOLOTL TO FEATHERTOP
LACON.
I WANTED TO ECHO BOTH MR.
VASQUEZ AND LORENZ SAID ABOUT
THE FACT THAT THOSE COULD BE
TALLER AND COULD BE EVEN BETTER
YET EVEN AS IT IS WITH THE
TWENTY TWO TWENTY TWO UNITS AND
THE FACT THAT THEY'RE THAT
ROUGHLY IT IS ROUGHLY
EQUIVALENT TO FIVE HUNDRED FIVE
HUNDRED TONS OF CO2 EQUIVALENT
PER UNIT IF YOU COMPARE LIVING
IN THE CITY AT TO OUTSIDE THE
CITY THAT'S ALREADY 10 THOUSAND
FOUR HUNDRED AND SIX TONS
OF CARBON TAKEN OUT OF THE AIR
EVERY YEAR OR ROUGHLY
EQUIVALENT TO THREE HUNDRED AND
FIFTY TREES.
>> I WOULD LOVE IT TO BE CLOSER
TO A THOUSAND TREES.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
WE HAVE NO OTHER INTEREST AT
THIS TIME.
>> THANK YOU.
I'LL CLOSE THE PUBLIC COMMENT
PERIOD AND MOVE TO THE MOTION
THAT I HAVE RECEIVED WHICH IS
THE ANN ARBOR CITY PLANNING
COMMISSION APPROVES THE EIGHT
FORTY ONE BROADWAY STREET SITE
PLAN VERSION SEVEN DATED JULY
16 TWENTY FIVE MOVE BY
COMMISSIONER SECONDED BY
COMMISSIONER MILLS.
WE ARE NOW IN DISCUSSION.
>> WE'LL START WITH
COMMISSIONER ADAMS QUESTION FOR
STAFF.
IS IT TIMELY?
YES IT IS MY UNDERSTANDING FROM
THE AND I I THINK I HEARD THE
PETITIONERS SAY A LITTLE
DIFFERENT.
I JUST WANT TO CONFIRM THIS IS
A ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL BASED
SITE PLAN AMENDMENT.
THERE WAS A STAFF DETERMINATION
THE STAFF REPORT THAT IT
COMPLIES WITH THE LEGAL
REQUIREMENTS SET FORTH IN THE
PDM FOR THE PARCEL AND WE ARE
OBLIGED ABSENT A DISAGREEMENT
WITH STAFF'S JUDGMENT REGARDING
ITS COMPLIANCE WITH THOSE LEGAL
REQUIREMENTS TO APPROVE IT.
>> DO I HAVE IT MORE OR LESS
STATED CORRECTLY?
THANK YOU.
COMMISSIONER ADAMS COMMISSIONER
DISH THANK YOU COMMISSIONER
ADAMS FOR EXCUSE ME FOR
CLARIFYING THAT POINT OF LAW.
COULD I ASK JUST A FEW
INFORMATIONAL QUESTIONS SO WE
DIDN'T SPECIFY AND I DON'T
THINK IT'S I MIGHT HAVE MISSED
IT IN THE STAFF REPORT BUT
AFFORDABLE AT WHAT INCOME RANGE
AND FOR HOW MANY YEARS?
>> I DON'T WANT TO MISSPEAK BUT
IT WAS SET FORTH IN THE PUDI
AND AND THE DEVELOPMENT
AGREEMENT UNDER THE CITY'S
REQUIREMENTS AND I BELIEVE
THOSE ARE AT SIXTY PERCENT AM I
BUT I DON'T WANT TO MISSPEAK OK
OR FULFILLING WHATEVER THOSE
REQUIREMENTS WERE.
>> I WILL LOOK BACK IN THE
SUPPLEMENTAL WHICH I HAVE
OPENED THEN HOW MANY OF THE
EIGHTEEN AFFORDABLE UNITS ARE
ONE BEDROOM.
>> WHAT IS THE MIX GO BACK WHEN
WE WERE GOING THROUGH THIS WITH
WITH THE COUNTY AS WELL WE WERE
TRYING AS BEST WE COULD TO
BALANCE THE MIX IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE MIX OF THE FOR SALE
CONDOS AS A GENERAL MATTER.
YEAH YEAH YOU HAVE TWENTY TWO
AND SIXTEEN WE HAVE SIXTEEN ONE
BEDROOM AND SIX TWO BEDROOM
RIGHT AND SO HOW MANY OF THE
AFFORDABLE UNITS ARE ONE
BEDROOM WOULD THEY ALL I WOULD
IMAGINE ALTHOUGH ONE BEDROOM
MUST BE AFFORDABLE SO THEN TWO
PROBABLY TWO OF THE TWO
BEDROOMS ARE AFFORDABLE.
>> GREAT.
I DON'T THINK THAT'S BEEN
DETERMINED FOR SURE YOU HAVEN'T
OK WE HAVEN'T DETERMINED OK
TOTALLY FINE YOU I LOVED YOUR
DESCRIPTION OF ALL THE THINGS
THAT WERE GOING ON WHEN YOU
WERE CONTEMPLATING WHETHER YOU
WERE GOING TO DO THE
PERMANENTLY OR THE UNIT
CREATION AND ONE OF THE THINGS
THAT YOU MENTIONED WAS THAT YOU
HAD TO ADDRESS THE FLOODPLAIN
ISSUES AND SO I WANTED YOU TO
SPEAK MORE TO HOW YOU DID THAT
THAT THAT'S HELPFUL.
>> AND I KNOW THAT WAS ALSO A
QUESTION FROM THE AUDIENCE.
>> OF COURSE FLOODPLAIN AND
FLOODWAY WERE ALWAYS AN ISSUE
ON THIS SITE.
THIS SITE REQUIRED AMONG OTHER
THINGS BECAUSE WE DIDN'T HAVE
ENOUGH ELSE TO DO OVER THE
COURSE OF THE LAST SIX YEARS
REQUIRED A LETTER OF MAP
REVISION AT THE FEMA LEVEL TO
IDENTIFY THE ACTUAL AREA
OF FLOODPLAIN AND FLOODWAY AND
AND WE ESTABLISHED OF COURSE
THAT ALL OF THE BUILT
ENVIRONMENT IS IN THE
FLOODPLAIN IN ACCORDANCE WITH
THE REQUIREMENTS OF FEMA OR NOT
ALL OF IT BUT THAT NONE OF IT
WAS IN THE FLOODWAY I THINK IS
THE MORE IMPORTANT STATEMENT TO
MAKE.
THAT BEING SAID AT THE TIME
THERE WAS CONCERN JUST
GENERALLY AS IT RELATED TO
POTENTIAL FLOOD EVENTS AND ON
TOP OF EVERYTHING ELSE I THINK
THERE WAS A MAJOR FLOOD EVENT
IN MIDLAND HALFWAY THROUGH THE
THE APPROVAL PROCESS AND SO IT
HEIGHTENED CONCERN AND SO AT
THE TIME AND I'LL BE THE FIRST
TO ADMIT I'M NOT CLEAR ON
WHETHER THE CITY ACTUALLY EVE
INCREASED THIS REQUIREMENT BUT
AT THE TIME THERE WAS A
REQUIREMENT THAT THAT ALL
RESIDENTIAL UNITS BE ABOVE A
ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD EVENT.
WE ACTUALLY AGREED TO BE ABOVE
FIVE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD EVENT
TO TO ALLEVIATE ANY PARTICULAR
CONCERN EVEN THOUGH THAT WAS
NOT STATUTORILY REQUIRED AT THE
TIME.
AND THIS BUILDING WOULD COMPLY
WITH THAT AS WELL.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
YEAH, I JUST WANT TO MAKE IT
CLEAR THAT WHILE RESIDENTIAL
CONSTRUCTION CANNOT HAPPEN IN A
FLOODWAY, IT CAN HAPPEN IN A
FLOOD PLAIN AND YOU WERE YOU
CAME IN UNDER THE OLD RULES
RULES BEFORE COUNCIL APPROVED
THE FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
BUT YOU COMPLY WITH THE
FLOODPLAIN OVERLAYING DISTRICT
VOLUNTARILY BECAUSE THAT WAS
WHEN WE MOVED FROM THE 100 TO
THE FIVE HUNDRED FOR
RESIDENTIAL IN A FLOODPLAIN NOT
IN THE FLOODWAY.
SO I WILL ASK THE QUESTION NOT
BECAUSE I'M NOT THRILLED THAT
YOU TURNED A ONE STORY INTO A
FOUR STORY RESIDENTIAL
AFFORDABLE BUILDING.
I I'M THRILLED IT AND THEY'LL
BE SO CLOSE TO MY FAVORITE
COFFEE SHOP SO YOU YOU HAVE 80
FEET THAT'S YOUR LIMIT BY THE
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS FOR
RESIDENTIAL.
SO I MEAN REALISTICALLY MAYBE
YOU COULD GO TO FIVE, MAYBE SIX
BUT YOU'RE PROBABLY NOT GOING
TO GO OVER THAT BECAUSE IT'S
NOT GOING TO MAKE SENSE FOR YOU
FINANCIALLY SINCE YOU CAN'T GO
VERY MUCH HIGHER.
>> SO HAD YOU CONSIDERED A
TALLER BUILDING, YOU KNOW,
USING A LITTLE BIT MORE OF THE
FAA THAT YOU HAVE?
>> BUT YEAH, I APPRECIATE THE
QUESTION BECAUSE IT ALSO GOES
TO SOME OF THE COMMENTS RAISED
BY BY THE PUBLIC WHAT WE WERE
TRYING TO DO OBVIOUSLY WAS
MAXIMIZE THE OPPORTUNITY AT
THIS LOCATION CONSISTENT WITH
LIMITATIONS ON ZONING.
WE WERE TRYING NOT TO BREAK OUR
REQUIREMENTS OR OTHER THINGS.
THOSE WEREN'T ACTUALLY THE
LIMITATIONS.
WHAT WHAT BECAME THE
LIMITATION?
WE'RE ACTUALLY DELIGHTED THAT
WE WERE ABLE TO GET MORE UNITS
ON THIS SITE THAN SIMPLY WE'RE
REQUIRED UNDER THE MINIMUM
AFFORDABILITY REQUIREMENTS AND
AND YOU KNOW, PART OF THAT WAS
ALSO THE DESIRE TO INCREASE
MULTIFAMILY ON THE SITE APART
FROM FOR SALE, WHICH WAS THE
CORE OF WHAT WE WERE ORIGINALLY
DELIVERING TO THE SITE.
>> BUT THE TIPPING POINT ON
THIS IS ALWAYS COST AND AND AND
IN THIS INSTANCE THE RATE
LIMITER IS NOT HEIGHT AS A
ZONING OR PLANNING COMMISSION
REQUIREMENT AS MUCH IT IS COST
AND GOING ONE MORE HIKE KICKS
US INTO THE HIGH RISE CODE AND
IT STARTS TO DEVOUR THE THE
BENEFITS OF THIS PROJECT WHICH
ARE READY.
I'M JUST GOING TO TELL YOU
TENUOUS IT WAS A VERY CLOSE
CALL BETWEEN WRITING THE CHECK
TO THE TRUST FUND OF TWO
MILLION DOLLARS AND INVESTING
THAT TWO DOLLARS MILLION INTO
THIS BUILDING AND TRYING TO
THEN INDUCE ADDITIONAL CAPITAL
IN THE PROJECT.
AND SO IT WAS JUST IT WAS JUST
TRYING TO HIT THAT BALANCE THAT
ALLOWS US TO TO ADD THESE UNITS
WITHOUT HAVING THE PROJECT
BECOME MORE COSTLY THAN THAN AN
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROJECT CAN
SUPPORT.
AND SO THAT THAT WAS THE
CALCULUS AND SO THIS ALLOWS US
TO STAY BELOW THE HIGH RISE
CODE ALLOWS US TO DEPLOY
CONSTRUCTION IN SOME OF THE
THINGS THAT REALLY MAKE NOT
JUST HOUSING AFFORDABLE TO THE
RESIDENTS BUT AFFORDABLE TO
BUILD.
AND I KNOW THAT IS NOT
NECESSARILY THIS BODY ISSUE BUT
IT IS AN ISSUE AS IT PERTAINS
TO ACTUALLY BUILDING HOUSING.
SO WE THINK SO.
SO THAT'S WHERE WE HIT THE
BALANCE AND WE JUST THOUGHT
COULD WE HAVE A FEW MORE
ADDITIONAL UNITS?
THAT'S WONDERFUL.
I THOUGHT FOR ONCE I WAS GOING
TO GET UNQUALIFIED SUPPORT FROM
MR. GERBER.
I DON'T KNOW WHERE HE WENT.
IT TURNS I DIDN'T BUILD ENOUGH
AFFORDABLE UNITS BUT BUT
ACTUALLY THOSE MARKET RATE
UNITS HELP SUBSIDIZE THE
AFFORDABLE UNITS IN THE
BUILDING AND NO ONE'S MAKING A
DIME ON THIS ONE BY THE TIME
IT'S DONE.
BUT IT'S THE RIGHT THING TO DO
AND WE WANTED TO DO IT.
YEAH, I REALLY APPRECIATE THAT
YOU'RE GOING TO MIX AFFORDABLE
AND MARKET RATE IN THE BUILDING
I THINK AND YOU'RE MAKING A
BEAUTIFUL BUILDING FOR THEM
ALL.
I LIVE IN I I WAS GOING TO SAY
SOMETHING ABOUT THE BROWNFIELD
STUFF BUT I'M WE'RE GOING TO BE
HERE FOR A LONG TIME SO UH I
GUESS JUST THE ONE OTHER
QUESTION THAT SORT OF REMAINS
ON THE TABLE IS WHETHER OR NOT
THERE'S ANY GEOTHERMAL.
>> OH YEAH.
YEAH.
LEAVE IT TO THE ENGINEER
STANDING BEFORE YOU TO TELL
THAT.
BUT BUT I WANT TO REMIND
EVERYBODY HOW CHALLENGING THIS
SITE WAS BENEATH
THE SOIL AND
GEOTHERMAL REQUIRES GOING
BENEATH.
SO I'M WHERE WE ARE ONCE WAS A
COAL GASIFICATION FACILITY WITH
WITH DEEP COAL TAR AND SO PART
OF THE EAGLE APPROVED
REMEDIATION PLAN VERY
COMPLICATED MULTIFACETED WAS
WAS THE PUBLIC SPACE WHICH I
LOVE USING THIS STATISTIC AND I
WAS IN THIS ROOM A FEW WEEKS
AGO BEFORE A DIFFERENT BODY
USING IT.
WE REMOVED 20000 TONS OF SOIL
FROM A SITE THROUGH THE
AUSPICES OF THE THE PUBLIC
DOLLARS THAT ARE ABLE TO BE
BROUGHT TO IT TO MAKE IT A
CLEAN SITE IN THE PUBLIC SPACE
WHERE WHERE THE PUBLIC TOUCHES
THE SOIL.
PART OF THIS PLAN IN THIS AREA
IS A CAP WHICH FOR ALL TIMES
LEAVES THE HISTORY OF COAL
GASIFICATION BENEATH THE SOIL.
BUT IT REALLY CHALLENGES THE
ABILITY TO USE TOOLS LIKE
GEOTHERMAL THAT I WOULD REMIND
EVERYONE WHO'S FAMILIAR WITH
THIS PROJECT AND AND AGAIN THIS
WAS PART AND PARCEL OF THE LONG
LIST OF THINGS THAT CAME OUT
OF THE PD.
IS THAT THE THAT WE ARE
BRINGING ALL ELECTRIC POWER TO
THIS ALL THE ELECTRIC POWERS
THAT HAVE BEEN BROUGHT TO THIS
SITE.
AND WITH ALL DUE RESPECT, YES,
THERE WILL BE SOME GAS ON THE
SITE.
IT WAS PART OF PART OF THE
INTERESTINGLY NEVER EVEN RAISED
FIVE YEARS AGO THAT THERE MIGHT
BE GAS ON THE SITE BUT ELECTRIC
ON THIS SITE IS BEING BROUGHT
BY STRICTLY RENEWABLE SOURCES
THROUGH THE MY GREEN ENERGY
PROGRAM.
SO I JUST WANTED TO POINT THAT
OUT AS WELL.
BUT IF I GET ANYTHING WRONG
LIKE OK, GOT IT SPOT ON.
I MEAN OBVIOUSLY WITH THE SOIL
CONDITIONS UNDERNEATH THERE
PUTTING GEOTHERMAL WELLS WOULD
BE A BAD IDEA
.
>> THANK YOU COMMISSIONER
MILLS.
THANK YOU.
AND THANKS FOR THE TABLES TOO.
I THINK THE COMPARISON OF WHAT
WAS AND HOW THIS FITS WAS
REALLY HELPFUL AND CLEAR.
THIS IS I PROBABLY ONCE UPON A
TIME WHEN YOU CAME THE FIRST
TIME AROUND WAS SAYING LIKE OK
,WHAT DO WE HAVE IN THE
SUPPLEMENTAL REGS AND HOW DOES
THAT COMPARE TO WHAT YOU'RE
PROPOSING AND IS IT LIKE WHAT
ARE PEOPLE'S WORST CASE
SCENARIOS?
THIS IS A GREAT EXAMPLE
OF WHERE HAVING SOME FLEXIBILE
ALLOWED YOU TO NOT HAVE A
COMPLETE REZONING AND SO IT
CLEARLY FITS WITH THE
SUPPLEMENTAL REGS THAT WE
ANTICIPATED THEN.
AND I THINK THAT THIS IS AGAIN
I THINK THIS IS EXCELLENT THAT
YOU ARE INCHING UP ON THAT FAAT
.
>> THE QUESTION THAT I HAVE IS
ACTUALLY ABOUT PARKING BECAUSE
BACK AT THAT TIME OUR
SUPPLEMENTAL REGS REQUIRE WELL
FIRST OF ALL OUR ZONING
CODE REQUIRED PARKING MINIMUMS
EVERYWHERE AND OUR SUPPLEMENTAL
REGS ACTUALLY INCLUDE THAT TO
SO I SO I SEE THAT YOU DO HAVE
PARKING.
I COULDN'T FIND THE
CALCULATIONS OF WHAT IS
REQUIRED BUT I DID SOME MATH
MYSELF SO YOU CAN CHECK ME OR
IF YOU KNOW WHAT'S REQUIRED
VERSUS WHAT YOU'RE PROVIDING I
DON'T KNOW OFF THE TOP OF MY
HEAD THE EXACT CALCULATION WAS
I HAD ON THAT ONE CHART IT JUST
SAYS ACCORDING TO THE
SUPPLEMENTAL REGS I THINK OH
THERE YOU GO.
>> OH YOU GOT IT FOR ME HERE I
WE'RE PROVIDING FOUR HUNDRED
NINETY FIVE PARKING SPACES THAT
REQUIRED IS FOR FORTY SEVEN NOW
WILL BE FOR FOUR POINT EIGHTY
WITH THE NEW I WAS GOING TO SAY
I CALCULATED FOUR FIFTY EIGHT
SO LIKE NOT BAD I I AGAIN THIS
IS NOT WELL FIRST OF ALL THIS
IS AN EXAMPLE OF I THINK THAT
MAYBE THIS IS FOR STAFF THEY'RE
STILL HELD TO THAT EVEN THOUGH
OTHERWISE IN THE CITY OF ANN
ARBOR WE HAVE DONE AWAY WITH
PARKING MINIMUMS RIGHT.
>> THAT'S CORRECT.
OK SO AND THIS IS JUST FOR
EVERYBODY ELSE'S BENEFIT A
SITUATION WHERE LIKE WHEN WE
HAVE PADS THAT ARE SPECIALLY
DESIGNED YOU ZONING DISTRICTS,
EVERY SINGLE ONE IS UNIQUE.
WE KIND OF LOCK THAT IN FOREVER
,WHICH IS ONE OF THE TRICKS
BECAUSE WE'VE MOVED AWAY FROM
THE PARKING MINIMUMS.
>> I'M JUST CURIOUS WHY YOU
MEET THE STANDARD.
I'M JUST CURIOUS WHY SLIGHTLY
MORE EVER SO SLIGHTLY MORE
YOU'RE PROVIDING MORE PARKING
THAN WHAT YOU WOULD BE REQUIRED
TO PROVIDE IT JUST YOU KNOW
THIS AS YOU REMEMBER ISHMAEL'S
FROM FROM THE DISCUSSIONS THE
ZONE THAT WAS PARKING IS REALLY
LOCKED INTO THAT USE AT THIS
JUNCTURE AND AND TOTALLY
UNDERSTANDING AND APPRECIATING
AND WISHING WE HAD HAD THE
DISPENSATION TO NOT MEET
MINIMUMS.
WE JUST NOW ARE LOOKING AT THIS
AS AS OK, WHAT IS THE MOST
EFFICIENT PARKING SYSTEM WITHIN
THAT ZONE AND IDENTIFIED A FEW
EXTRA SPACES AND AND AND THE
REALITY IS THERE WILL BE
SUBSTANTIAL NEED FOR PARKING
WELL EXCEEDS THE ABILITY
OF THIS SITE TO SUPPORT WITH
THE PUBLIC SPACE AND IT JUST
STRUCK US AS AN OPPORTUNITY TO
TO TO ENSURE ADEQUATE PARKING.
OK, WHAT COMES DOWN TO YOU
HAVEN'T CHANGED THE PARKING
GARAGE EFFECTIVELY AND IT'S NOT
WORTH THE I MEAN IT LOOKS LIKE
WHAT YOU PROPOSED BEFORE WAS
FOUR NINETY EVEN THAT IT'S NOT
BACK THEN EVEN FEWER SPOTS WERE
REQUIRED BECAUSE YOU HAD LESS
SQUARE FOOTAGE JUST FOR
EVERYONE ELSE AND SO YOU'RE
CLOSER ACTUALLY TO BUT YOU CAN
ADD ANY MORE PARKING OTHER EVEN
THOUGH YOU ADDED MORE FLOOR
AREA.
SO I GUESS THAT'S A BETTER YEAH
.
>> THANK YOU.
I THANK YOU FOR THAT ANSWER.
ANYONE ELSE COMMISSIONER LEAVE
SURE.
TO PARAPHRASE COMMISSIONER
ADAMS THIS IS EFFECTIVELY BY
WITHIN THE PUTI ZONING THAT
EXISTS CORRECT?
THAT'S CORRECT.
OK, WELL THAT MAKES IT EASY FOR
ME SO.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR
BRINGING THIS.
I LOVE THE FACT THAT THERE IS
JUST ONE OF THE THINGS I DO
WANT TO MENTION IS CONNECTED
RIVERFRONT TRAIL PADDLE CRAFT
LAUNCH RENTAL FACILITY GALLERY
SPACE PERFORMANCE LAWN.
I THINK THIS IS AN INCREDIBLE
ADDITION TO THIS PARTICULAR
AREA AND WE'LL HAVE A LOT
OF PLACEMAKING AND MEANINGFUL
MEMORIES THAT ARE MADE ON THIS
SITE.
>> SO I THINK IT'S A IT'S A
GREAT IMPROVEMENT AND WE ARE AN
ADMINISTRATIVE BODY THAT IS
BOUND WITHIN TO SAY HEY WITHIN
ZONING WHAT IS PERMITTED HERE
WITHIN THE PD SO I'M IN
SUPPORT.
>> THANK YOU.
PLANNER THATCHER, JUST TO ADD
THAT THE AFFORDABLE UNITS ARE
AT SIXTY PERCENT AND I THANK
YOU.
>> YEAH PERFECT.
THANK YOU.
GLAD I REMEMBERED SOMETHING FOR
MY PART.
JUST TO FOLLOW UP FROM MR.
GARBER'S COMMENT OR YOUR
COMMENT ABOUT MR. GOMERA
GETTING HIS SUPPORT, IT WOULD
BE TO MOVE IT TO ALL ELECTRIC
THAT WOULD GET HIS UNIVERSAL
SUPPORT FOR THIS.
I ACTUALLY DIDN'T HEAR THAT.
I MEAN I CAN ASK HIM AND HE CAN
COME BACK UP AND DO IT BECAUSE
THE BUT BUT IF IF WE ARE
COMMITTED TO ALL ELECTRIC IN
THIS BUILDING.
IN THIS BUILDING.
SURE.
AND THEN JUST TO ECHO
COMMISSIONER MILLS ON THE
PARKING I THINK I UNDERSTAND
BECAUSE THAT WAS GOING TO BE MY
QUESTION.
WHY DO WE I ACTUALLY STARTED
WITH PLANNER THATCHER BEFORE
THE MEETING TO MAKE SURE I
UNDERSTOOD THAT THIS PARKING
REQUIREMENT CAME WITH THE PD
AND IT SOUNDS LIKE IT'S IN A
STRUCTURE IS THIS THAT WHERE
THE MAJORITY OF IT IS ACTUALLY
IT'S ABOUT FIFTY FIFTY WE
SURFACE AND THAT STRUCTURE
SURFACE THE CONCERN OF YOUR
PREDECESSORS FOR THE MOST PART
THOUGH NOT EVERYONE WAS A
PREDECESSOR WAS THAT WAS THE
AMOUNT OF PERMEABLE SPACE ON
THE SITE AND THE PARKING
STRUCTURE AND AND MEETING THE
MINIMUM REQUIRED THE PARKING
STRUCTURE TO TO ACHIEVE THOSE
MINIMUMS.
>> ALL OF IT IS NON PERMEABLE
WITH THE EXCEPTION.
NO, ALL OF IT IS NOW ALL THE
PARTIES INVOLVED.
SO WE LOCKED IN TO THAT TO TO
MEET THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE PD
WHILE MINIMIZING PERMEABLE
SURFACE AND NON PERMEABLE
SURFACES ON A SITE THAT WAS THE
BALANCE WE WERE TRYING TO
STRIKE SIX YEARS AGO.
SURE.
AND WE'RE IN A DIFFERENT
ENVIRONMENT NOW AND YOU HAVE A
DIFFERENT COMMISSION THAT AND
YOU DON'T HAVE THE PARKING
REQUIREMENTS.
SO IF AT ANY POINT BETWEEN NOW
OR HAS BEEN ORDERED BUT THEN IT
SOUNDS LIKE YOU HAVE
APPROXIMATELY FOUR HUNDRED OR
EXCUSE ME TWO HUNDRED TWENTY
SPACES THAT ARE SURFACE THAT
YOU COULD REMEDIATE IN A
DIFFERENT WAY AND I THINK IF
YOU BROUGHT THAT AMENDMENT BACK
TO THE TABLE WE WOULD GLADLY
RECEIVE THAT AND HAVE A ROBUST
DISCUSSION TO AMEND THAT
AMENDMENT.
SO JUST WANTED TO GIVE THAT TO
YOU AND WITH THAT WE WILL MOVE
TO A ROLL-CALL VOTE
.
SORRY I GOT TO FIND MY
COMMISSIONER LIST.
IT'S SORRY
.
ALL RIGHT.
COMMISSIONER WISCH.
YES, COMMISSIONER ABRAMS.
YES, COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT
WAS NOT PRESENT.
COMMISSIONER LEA YES.
COMMISSIONER DISH YES.
COMMISSIONER MILLS YES.
COMMISSIONER WEATHERBEE YES.
COMMISSIONER ADAM YES.
COMMISSIONER NORTEN YES.
>> PASSES GREAT.
THANK YOU.
>> GOOD LUCK.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME.
WE'LL MOVE NOW TO ITEM TEN BE
THE ANN ARBOR COMMUNITY LAND
TRUSTS TEXT AMENDMENT.
WE'LL START WITH WE'LL START
WITH A PETITIONER PRESENTATION
WITH SARAH LORENZI, EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR AND THE BOARD
PRESIDENT ROBIN HALL THAT WILL
BE FOLLOWED BY A STAFF
PRESENTATION BY PLANNER MARLENE
COCHRANE.
AND THEN WE WILL HAVE A PUBLIC
HEARING FOLLOWED BY THE
PLANNING COMMISSION'S
DISCUSSION OF THIS PETITION.
HI, GOOD
EVENING.
>> GOOD EVENING.
I HAVE TEN MINUTES.
YOU DO CORRECT.
OK, GREAT.
MY NAME IS SARAH LAWRENCE.
I'M THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
OF THE NRA COMMUNITY LAND TRUST
WHICH HAS BEEN IN PLANNING FOR
ABOUT SIX YEARS.
IT SEEMS LIKE WE'RE HAVING JUST
A SLIGHT PROBLEM TO SEE THERE.
THANK YOU.
IT'S STILL NOT SHOWING UP ON
OUR SCREENS.
IT'S SHOWING UP ON THE LARGE
SCREEN.
I MEAN WE CAN WE CAN ALL JUST
TURN AROUND.
IS EVERYONE OK WITH THAT?
OK, ALL RIGHT.
OH, AND THERE IT IS.
>> OK, GREAT.
>> OKAY LET'S SEE.
ALL RIGHT WE ARE HERE TO
PETITION FOR AN AFFORDABLE
AIDOO DENSITY BONUS AN
AMENDMENT TO THE ADA ORDINANCE
OUR INITIAL SUBMISSION
REQUESTED DENSITY BONUS THAT
WAS AROUND SEVENTEEN HUNDRED
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA.
WE HAD BEEN TOLD THAT WE NEEDED
TO COUCH THIS IN A FLOOR AREA
TERMINOLOGY THAT WASN'T REALLY
WHAT WE WANTED.
WHAT WE ARE TRYING TO ACHIEVE
HERE IS TO BE ABLE TO BUILD
THIS SPECIFIC TYPE OF UNIT THAT
OUR GENERAL CONTRACTOR CAN
BUILD FOR AN AMAZINGLY
AFFORDABLE PRICE THIS IS VERY
DESIRABLE FOR OUR POTENTIAL
BUYERS AND WE WOULD LIKE TO BE
ABLE TO DO THIS ALL OVER THE
CITY.
THEY'RE VERY QUICK TO BUILD
VERY COST EFFECTIVE AND MOST
IMPORTANTLY THEY HAVE THREE
BEDROOMS THERE ARE MANY
MUNICIPALITIES THAT ARE NOW
ALLOWING LARGER USE OF UP TO
TWELVE HUNDRED SQUARE FEET OR
EVEN LARGER THE ENTIRE STATE
OF CALIFORNIA, MONTANA,
PORTLAND, OREGON, FAYETTEVILLE,
ARKANSAS AND SO WE'RE PROPOSING
SOMETHING ALONG THESE LINES
ALTHOUGH WE ARE OPEN TO OTHER
REVISIONS TO THIS THAT FOR LOTS
WHERE ALL UNITS ARE PERMANENTLY
AFFORDABLE TO HOUSEHOLDS
AVERAGING AT OR BELOW THE AREA
MEDIAN INCOME A TWO STORY AIDOO
MAY HAVE A MAXIMUM OF ELEVEN
HUNDRED SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR
AREA OF FINISHED SPACE
EXCLUDING STAIRWAYS, STAIR
LANDINGS AND UNFINISHED
BASEMENTS.
SO PART OF WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO
ACCOMPLISH HERE IS TO BE ABLE
TO HAVE AN UNFINISHED BASEMENT
IN AN EDU WHICH IS NOT
CURRENTLY ALLOWED UNDER THE
DEFINITION OF FLOOR AREA.
SO THIS IS, YOU KNOW, TRYING TO
THREAD THE NEEDLE HERE.
SO I WILL ADD SOME ADDITIONAL
CONTEXT FOR THIS AND THEN WE
CAN COME BACK TO THE SPECIFICS
.
THE NEIGHBOR COMMUNITY LAND
TRUST IS A NEW NONPROFIT
DEVELOPER AND A LONG TERM
STEWARD OF HOUSING ON BEHALF
OF THE COMMUNITY WE'RE FOCUSED
ON HOME OWNERSHIP OR MISSING
MIDDLE TYPE HOUSING
PARTICULARLY TARGETED FOR
CRITICAL WORKERS WHO HELP RUN
OUR COMMUNITY.
WE'RE LOOKING AT PERMANENT
AFFORDABILITY IN PERPETUITY
THAT THE HOMES WOULD LAST
HOPEFULLY FOR ONE HUNDRED AND
FIFTY YEARS ON AVERAGE AND THEN
WHEN THEY WERE OBSOLETE AND
TORN DOWN, NEW AFFORDABLE HOMES
WOULD BE BUILT THERE.
WE'RE ALSO HOPING TO HELP OUR
RESIDENTS HAVE LOWER COSTS BY
SAVING AND COMMUTING VEHICLES
WI FI AND ENERGY AND WE
ANTICIPATE HAVING A COMMUNITY
BOARD IN PERPETUITY WHICH MAY
INCLUDE A CITY REPRESENTATIVE
AND ENCOURAGING STRONG SOCIAL
TIES.
HERE'S OUR FOUNDING BOARD
OF DIRECTORS WHICH IS ON OUR
WEBSITE.
WE HOPE TO BUILD MORE THAN
THESE ADIEUS.
WE HOPE TO BUILD A BROAD RANGE
OF HOUSING TYPES UNDER THE NEW
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN OUR CURRENT
AFFORDABILITY APPROACH OR
FORMULA INCLUDES BUILDING SMALL
HOMES THAT DEVELOPERS NO LONGER
BUILD, TRYING TO BUILD TWO
HOMES ON EVERY LOT WHICH WE'RE
DISCUSSING TONIGHT UTILIZING
THE PRODUCTION COSTS OF A LARGE
HOMEBUILDING COMPANY WHICH CAN
PRODUCE VERY LOW CONSTRUCTION
COSTS WHICH WE'RE NOT ABLE TO
ACHIEVE ON OUR OWN AND THEN
UTILIZING MR. GRANTS AND
HOUSING TIF FROM THE CITY AND
COUNTY TO PROVIDE FURTHER
SUBSIDY TO THE LOWER THE PRICE
OF THESE HOMES.
SO WE WOULD LIKE TO MAKE IT
LEGAL TO BUILD THESE TYPES
OF HOMES AGAIN WE HAVE HOMES
LIKE THIS ON THE OLD WEST SIDE
AND CARRIE TOWN, OTHER PARTS
OF TOWN WHERE YOU HAVE EXISTING
HOMES AROUND TWELVE HUNDRED
SQUARE FEET OR SMALLER AND VERY
SMALL LOTS WHICH ARE NOT
ALLOWED ANYMORE.
THE PROPOSED HOME THAT WE ARE
DISCUSSING OR SIMILAR MODELS
WOULD BE VERY SIMILAR TO THIS
BUT AS YOU CAN SEE THESE
EXISTING HOMES ARE SELLING WELL
INTO THE FIVE AND SIX HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLAR RANGE OURS
WOULD BE FOR SALE BETWEEN ONE
HUNDRED AND TWENTY FIVE AND
THREE AND TWENTY FIVE THOUSAND
DOLLARS.
>> HERE'S ANOTHER EXAMPLE THESE
BRICK TOWNHOUSES ARE ON STADIO
AND SNIDER RIGHT ACROSS FROM
THE STADIUM IN PIONEER HIGH
SCHOOL.
THESE ARE ON LOTS OF HALF
OF THE DUPLEX IS ON A LOT
OF ITS OWN WITH A ZERO LOT LINE
OF UNDER THREE THOUSAND SQUARE
FEET WELL UNDER UNDER TWENTY
FIVE HUNDRED SQUARE FEET.
WE WOULD LIKE TO DO SOMETHING
SIMILAR AS WELL.
BUT RIGHT NOW WE'RE BEING
FORCED TO CREATE MASTER DEEDS
AND CONDOS BECAUSE THIS TYPE
OF HOUSING IS NO LONGER LEGAL
IN THE CITY.
OUR GENERAL CONTRACTOR THAT
WE'VE HIRED FOR THIS PROJECT IS
NORFORK HOMES THERE ANN ARBOR
BASED THEY'RE BUILDING HUNDREDS
OF HOMES AND OTHER CITIES AND
WE WANT TO BUILD HUNDREDS
OF HOMES HERE IN ANN ARBOR.
THEY'RE ABLE TO BUILD IN
JACKSON FOR AROUND ONE HUNDRED
AND SEVENTY FIVE THOUSAND
DOLLARS BECAUSE THE CITY IS
GIVING THEM FREE LOTS AND FREE
UTILITIES RUN UP ON TO THE
VACANT LOTS.
>> SO HERE ARE SOME OF OUR
NUMBERS.
THE AVERAGE SMALL HOME ON A
SINGLE LOT WOULD BE AROUND ONE
HUNDRED AND FIFTY THOUSAND
DOLLARS A LOT FIFTY THOUSAND
DOLLARS FOR UTILITIES AND CITY
FEES ABOUT TWO HUNDRED THOUSAND
DOLLARS FOR CONSTRUCTION AROUND
FIFTY THOUSAND DOLLARS OR A
LITTLE BIT MORE FOR
SUSTAINABILITY UPGRADES FOR ALL
ELECTRIC HOMES.
SO WITHOUT A DEVELOPER TAKING
ANY KIND OF PROFIT WE'RE AT
AROUND FOUR AND FIFTY THOUSAND
DOLLARS.
BUT IF WE CAN SPLIT THE COST
OF THAT LOT AND THE UTILITIES
FOR TWO SMALL HOMES WE CAN
REDUCE THE COST OF EACH HOME BY
ABOUT ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND.
SO YOU SEE WE GO FROM FOUR
HUNDRED AND FIFTY FOR THAT ONE
SMALL HOME TO THREE HUNDRED AND
FIFTY IF WE HAVE TWO HOMES
THERE AND THEN WE INTEND TO
ALSO ACCESS MR. GRANT'S OR
HOUSING TIF FROM THE CITY AND
THAT IS HOW WE CAN ACHIEVE
THESE PRICES OF ONE TWENTY FIVE
TO THREE AND TWENTY FIVE
THOUSAND FOR THIS SPECIFIC
MODEL THAT OUR BUILDER HAS
READY TO BUILD AND HAS ALREADY
PROTOTYPED IN JACKSON IT IS THE
MOST COST EFFICIENT INFILL HOME
POSSIBLE THAT WE HAVE BEEN ABLE
TO FIND.
IT'S VERY DESIRABLE TO OUR
BUYERS AND ONE OF THE REASONS
THAT WE WANT A THREE BEDROOM
HOME IS THAT WE ANTICIPATE
THESE HOMES PROVIDING HOUSING
FOR FAMILIES FOR THE NEXT
HUNDRED AND FIFTY YEARS.
SO WE WOULD LIKE ALL THESE
HOMES TO HAVE THREE BEDROOMS
AND AN UNFINISHED BASEMENT.
YOU CAN SEE THE FLOOR AREA
ANAPOLIS THIS COMES TO ABOUT
ONE THOUSAND SEVENTY TWO SQUARE
FEET OF FLOOR AREA OF FINISHED
LIVING SPACE ABOVE GROUND IF WE
COUNT THE FLOOR AREA DEFINITION
THAT THE CITY SPECIFIES AS
INCLUDING AN UNFINISHED
BASEMENT IT IS AROUND SIXTEEN
HUNDRED AND EIGHT SQUARE FEET
OF FLOOR AREA AND SO THAT LED
US TO THIS SORT OF MISLEADING
REQUEST OF ADULT DENSITY BONUS
OF SEVENTEEN HUNDRED SQUARE
FEET OF FLOOR AREA.
BUT I THINK IT'S VERY
MISLEADING TO THE PUBLIC
BECAUSE WE DON'T REALLY WANT TO
BUILD ANY USE OF SEVENTEEN
HUNDRED SQUARE FEET.
I THINK MOST PEOPLE PERCEIVE
SQUARE FOOTAGE TO REFER TO
FINISHED LIVING SPACE ABOVE
GROUND.
IT ONLY COSTS ABOUT THIRTEEN
THOUSAND DOLLARS TO UPGRADE THE
SIZE OF THIS HOME FROM EIGHT
HUNDRED SQUARE FEET TO TWELVE
AND THIRTY TWO SQUARE FEET.
IF YOU JUST MEASURE THE
FOOTPRINT.
SO TO GO FROM A TWO BEDROOM TO
A THREE BEDROOM IS ONLY ABOUT
THIRTEEN THOUSAND DOLLARS AND
OVER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY YEAR
LIFESPAN.
THESE HOMES WE THINK IT IS MUCH
WISER TO INVEST IN THREE
BEDROOM HOMES SO WE COULD APPLY
TO REZONE ALL OF OUR PROPERTIES
TO SEE ACHIEVE MUCH THE SAME
OUTCOME.
A FEW PROBLEMS HERE WE WOULD
LIKE TO HAVE A MECHANISM TO
BUILD AT LEAST 50 HOMES PER
YEAR AND WE DO NOT WANT TO HAVE
TO APPLY FOR REZONING EACH TIME
BECAUSE OF THE COST AND TIME
THERE WOULD LIKELY BE
NEIGHBORHOOD OPPOSITION TO SPOT
ZONING IN SOME CASES R2 DOES
NOT ALLOW PRIVATE DRIVES FOR
FLATS THAT ARE THREE DEEP WHICH
MANY OF THE FLATS IN ANN ARBOR
WOULD BE.
OUR ONE DOES ALLOW THIS AND
MOST IMPORTANTLY ACTUALLY IS
THAT IT'S EASIER FOR US TO GET
FUNDING AND SOME OF OUR BUYERS
COULD PURCHASE THE LOTS IF WE
COULD REPAIR THEM TOGETHER.
SO THIS IS ACTUALLY THE MOST
IMPORTANT ELEMENT RIGHT HERE.
WE ARE COMMITTED TO MANAGING
PERMANENT AFFORDABILITY THROUGH
THE ENTIRE COMMUNITY LAND
TRUST.
THERE ARE OVER THREE HUNDRED
AND FORTY FOUR COMMUNITY LAND
TRUSTS CURRENTLY ACROSS THE
COUNTRY RIGHT NOW.
SO THIS IS BEING DONE ALL OVER
THE COUNTRY WITH GREAT SUCCESS.
WE INVITE THE CITY TO ENGAGE
WITH A PUBLIC PRIVATE
PARTNERSHIP IF THAT IS
OF INTEREST TO AND TO HAVE A
BOARD SEAT FOR A CITY OFFICIAL
WE HAVE VARIOUS WAYS TO MANAGE
THIS AFFORDABILITY WITH DEED
RESTRICTIONS GROUNDLESSLY ZEN
MASTER DEEDS AND OTHER
MECHANISMS.
SO WE ARE READY TO DO THIS.
WE ARE READY TO BREAK GROUND
NEXT MONTH ON SOME OF THESE
LOGS AND WE WOULD LIKE TO
REQUEST THIS AMENDMENT
.
>> THANK YOU MISS LLORENS.
WE'LL TURN NOW TO PLAN A
MILLION COCHRANE TO GIVE US THE
STAFF REPORT.
>> SURE WE CAN.
THANK YOU TO THE PETITIONER THE
LANGUAGE THAT YOU HAVE BEFORE
YOU WAS SUBMITTED BY THE ANN
ARBOR COMMUNITY LAND TRUST AND
IT DID GO BEFORE THE ORDINANCE
REVISIONS COMMITTEE ON JULY
22ND OF THIS YEAR JUST A MONTH
AGO AND STAFF DID EXPRESS SOME
OF THE CONCERNS ABOUT THE
LANGUAGE THAT ARE INCLUDED IN
THAT NORC MEMO THAT IS PART
OF THE PACKET MOSTLY THAT THE
INCREASED ACCESSORY DWELLING
UNIT MAXIMUM SIZE IS CONTRARY
TO THE INTENT TO USE AS DEFINED
IN THE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT
CODE AS AN ALTERNATIVE FORM
OF HOUSING THAT IS ACCESSORY TO
A PRINCIPAL WHILE ALSO THE CITY
DOES NOT HAVE A MECHANISM TO
TRACK SALES OF RESTRICTED
PROPERTIES.
SO THE CITY ITSELF COULD NOT
ENFORCE THE AFFORDABILITY
REQUIREMENT THAT'S PROPOSED IN
THE LANGUAGE.
AND THEN THERE ARE SOME OTHER
CONCERNS SUCH AS THE OCCUPANCY
LIMIT THAT IS CURRENTLY DEFINED
IN THE CODE BOTH THE ACCESSORY
DWELLING UNIT AND THE PRIMARY
UNIT ON THE LAW ARE SUBJECT TO
THE SAME OCCUPANCY LIMIT WHICH
MIGHT PRESENT SOME PROBLEMS AND
THERE'S FURTHER INFORMATION IN
THE STAFF MEMO AND IN THE OAC
MEMO AFTER THAT ORDINANCE
REVISIONS COMMITTEE MEETING
STAFF DID EXPLORE OTHER OPTIONS
FOR DIFFERENT LANGUAGE LIKE A
BONUS UNIT SINGLE FAMILY LOTS
IF IT WAS AFFORDABLE BUT.
BUT THE SAME ENFORCEABILITY
CONCERNS KEPT COMING UP.
SO OVERALL TONIGHT STAFF
APPLAUDS APPLICANT'S GOALS BUT
DOESN'T BELIEVE THAT THIS
LANGUAGE IS THE MOST SUITABLE
WAY TO ACHIEVE THESE GOALS.
CHANGES TO ZONING WILL OCCUR
AFTER THE ADOPTION OF THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN AND
THOSE ARE LIKELY TO ALLOW
ADDITIONAL DENSITY WHERE
CURRENTLY WHERE PLACES ARE
CURRENTLY ZONED FOR SINGLE
FAMILY COULD HAVE TWO OR EVEN
MORE FAMILY HOUSES.
SO STAFF BELIEVES THAT THESE
CONVERSATIONS SHOULD TAKE PLACE
IN THE CONTEXT OF THE CITY WIDE
LAND USE CHANGES AND NOT AS A
TEXT AMENDMENT TO THE CURRENT
CODE AND ALSO JUST SAY THAT
PLANNING MANAGER LEONARD IS
AVAILABLE RIGHT NOW FOR
ADDITIONAL QUESTIONS.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR THE
STAFF REPORT.
WE NOW COME TO A PUBLIC HEARING
FOR THIS TEXT AMENDMENT.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
INDIVIDUALS BOTH IN THE
CHAMBERS AND ONLINE TO SPEAK UP
TO THREE MINUTES ON THE
PROPOSED ANN ARBOR COMMUNITY
LAND TRUSTS TEXT AMENDMENT.
WE'LL FIRST HEAR FROM THOSE WHO
ARE PRESENT IN THE CHAMBER.
THEN WE WILL TURN TO REMOTE
PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK REMOTELY
PRESS STAR NINE IF ON PHONE OR
USE THE RACE HAND FEATURE IN
ZOOME FOR PHONE ACCESS CALL
EIGHT SEVEN SEVEN EIGHT FIVE
THREE FIVE TO FOUR SEVEN AND IN
OUR MEETING I'D NINE SEVEN
SEVEN SIX SIX THREE FOUR ONE
TWO TWO SIX CITY STAFF WILL
IDENTIFY CALLERS BY THE LAST
THREE DIGITS OF THEIR PHONE
NUMBER OR BY NAME.
IF ON ZOOM YOU'LL HEAR AN
ANNOUNCEMENT WHEN IT'S YOUR
TURN TO SPEAK PLEASE MOVE TO A
QUIET AREA AND MUTE ANY
BACKGROUND NOISE FOR ALL
PARTICIPANTS EITHER IN THE
CHAMBER OR ON ZOOME PLEASE
STATE YOUR NAME AND ADDRESS AT
THE BEGINNING OF YOUR COMMENTS
.
IS THERE ANYONE PRESENT IN THE
CHAMBERS WHO WOULD LIKE TO
SPEAK AT THIS TIME?
HI MY NAME IS SOPHIE JAWORSKI.
I AM A FORMER ANN RESIDENT AND
A FUTURE ANN ARBOR COMMUNITY
INTEREST HOME BUYER SO I
CURRENTLY LIVE IN HOWELL,
MICHIGAN SO I AM NOT A CURRENT
RESIDENT OF THE RIVER FOR THE
LAST SIX YEARS I BEEN WORKING
AS AN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATOR
AT THE GRETCHEN'S HOUSE
LOCATION ON OAK VALLEY TEACHING
YOUNG CHILDREN DURING THAT TIME
I HAVE ALSO BEEN COMMUTING
FIFTY FIVE MINUTES TWICE A DAY
FROM MY APARTMENT AND HOWELL
THROUGH WORKING WITH THE ANN
ARBOR ZOLT I AM PROUD TO BE ONE
OF THEIR INAUGURAL HOMEBUYERS
WITH THE HOME TO BE BUILT ON
MAPLE ROAD EXACTLY ONE POINT
ONE MILES AWAY FROM MY WORK.
>> HAVING THIS HOME WILL CHANGE
THE LIVES OF MY HUSBAND FOR THE
BETTER CUTTING BACK ON OUR
COMMUTES TO WORK, ALLOWING FOR
US TO SPEND MORE TIME WITH MY
FAMILY STILL LIVING IN THE
BURNS PARK NEIGHBORHOOD AS WELL
AS WELL AS ALLOW US TO CONSIDER
STARTING A FAMILY OF OUR OWN IN
THE CITY THAT WE KNOW AND LOVE
SUPPORTING THE AMENDMENT FOR IN
THE R-1 ZONING WOULD NOT ONLY
ALLOW FOR MY HUSBAND AND I TO
LIVE IN OUR FUTURE HOME SOONER
BUT IT WOULD ALLOW MY FELLOW
HOME BUYERS TO LIVE IN THEIR
FUTURE HOMES AS WELL.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME AND I
LOOK FORWARD TO WORKING WITH
YOU AS A PART OF COMMUNITY.
THANK YOU.
HI MY NAME IS ASHLEY.
I FROM CANTON AND I CURRENTLY
WORK AT THE DISTRICT COURT IN
ANN ARBOR.
I HAVE A RESERVATION FOR AN ANN
ARBOR COMMUNITY LAND TRUST HOME
AT TWO THREE FIVE S WAGNER ROAD
IN ANN ARBOR.
WHEN I FIRST CAME ACROSS THE
DELISTINGS REGARDING A T I WAS
VERY TOUCHED BECAUSE I KNEW
THIS WAS GOING TO CHANGE MANY
LIVES.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING IS A
CRITICAL RESOURCE THAT CAN
DRAMATICALLY HELP OTHERS
OFFERING STABILITY, SECURITY
AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR
INDIVIDUALS AND FAMILIES.
THIS WILL CHANGE MY LIFE
ESPECIALLY AS A FIRST TIME
HOMEBUYER.
I WORK REALLY HARD TO SUPPORT
MYSELF BUT DUE TO RISING COSTS
AND WAGES THAT DO NOT MATCH
INFLATION, I FIND IT
CHALLENGING TO AFFORD A SAFE
AND STABLE LIVING ENVIRONMENT
PLUS BEING IN A STRONG AND SAFE
COMMUNITY WOULD HAVE A POSITIVE
IMPACT NOT ONLY ON THE PEOPLE
WHO LIVE IN WASHTENAW COUNTY
BUT THE EMPLOYEES COUNTY.
>> WITH THE SUPPORT I WOULD BE
ABLE TO SAVE MORE, INVEST IN
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT, WORK
AND CONTRIBUTE TO THE LOCAL
ECONOMY.
WE ARE EAGER TO START BUILDING
AND GETTING INTO THESE HOMES
AND THE BEAUTIFUL CITY OF ANN
ARBOR WE REQUEST AN AMENDMENT
THAT WOULD ALLOW TWO HOMES TO
BE BUILT ON EACH LOT.
THIS IS ABSOLUTELY CRITICAL FOR
A COUNTY BECAUSE NOT ONLY WILL
IT MAKE THEM HOMES MORE
AFFORDABLE BUT MORE HARDWORKING
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES WILL HAVE
THE OPPORTUNITY FOR THIS
HOUSING.
WE APPRECIATE YOU TAKING THE
TIME TO HELP US FIGHT FOR OUR
HOUSING.
THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS TIM MCGRAW AND I
CURRENTLY RENT A HOME IN WARD
FIVE.
I'M ALSO A CARE HOME RESERVE AT
1780 SAY CHURCH ROAD.
IT'S A TWO BEDROOM TOWN HOME
HERE IN ANN ARBOR AND IS
EXPECTED TO BE BUILT SOON BY
THE ENTIRE COMMUNITY LAND
TRUST.
I WOULD LIKE TO THANK YOU FOR
YOUR WORK AND I SAW ALL THE
GENEROUS COMMENTS TONIGHT AND
YOUR SUPPORT OF PROJECTS LIKE
THIS.
SO I WOULD LIKE TO ASK YOU FOR
YOUR SUPPORT FOR THE APPROVAL
OF THE AMENDMENT TO ALLOW FOR
TWO HOMES TO BE BUILT ON OUR
ONE LOT AT AN AFFORDABLE PRICE
AND SPECIFICALLY FOR MY FUTURE
HOME.
IT WILL ALLOW THE BUILDING OF A
BASEMENT AS WELL.
I FEEL VERY FORTUNATE AND VERY
EXCITED TO HAVE BEEN SELECTED
FOR THE LOTTERY PROCESS TO BE
THE HOME BUYER OF THIS LOVELY
DOWNTOWN HOME.
THIS OPPORTUNITY TO OWN A HOME
IN OUR CITY IS INCREDIBLY
IMPORTANT TO ME AND TO MY
FAMILY.
IT MEANS STABILITY FOR US.
I'M A TEACHER HERE IN ANN ARBOR
PUBLIC SCHOOLS AND HAVE BEEN
LIVING FOR THE PIER FOR THE
PAST TWENTY YEARS.
I HAVE BEEN WORKING AS A
TEACHER GENERAL PUBLIC SCHOOL
SINCE 2010 AND I'M A SINGLE
PARENT.
MY CHILD GOES TO ANN ARBOR
PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
I'M INVESTED IN THE COMMUNITY
AND YET I HAVE BEEN RENTING FOR
MANY YEARS NOW UNABLE TO AFFORD
A HOME FOR THIS REASON I WOULD
LIKE TO ASK FOR YOUR SUPPORT
FOR THE BUILDING OF THE ENTIRE
COMMUNITY LAND TRUST HOMES.
I WOULD LIKE TO ASK FOR YOUR
APPROVAL OF THE AMENDMENT THAT
WOULD FACILITATE THE BUILDING
OF AFFORDABLE HOMES FOR FOUR
ESSENTIAL WORKERS LIKE ME.
I WOULD LIKE FOR US TO BE ABLE
TO LIVE HERE IN ANN ARBOR WHERE
WE WORK INSTEAD OF COMMUTING
AND TO BE ABLE TO RAISE OUR
FAMILIES HERE WITH DIGNITY
BECAUSE WE ARE PART OF THIS
COMMUNITY AND WE CONTRIBUTE TO
IT THROUGH OUR HARD WORK TIME
AND ENERGY.
WE DESERVE TO BE ABLE TO AFFORD
TO BUY HOMES HERE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING AGAIN.
COME BEFORE THE COMMITTEE WARD
FIVE I URGE YOU TO SUPPORT THIS
AMENDMENT AND DO WHATEVER YOU
CAN DO TO ADDRESS THE OBSTACLES
THAT ARE RAISED IN THE PLANNER
REPORT.
I STARTED MY PREVIOUS COMMENT
ASKING WHAT WILL IT TAKE TO
HELP A HOMEOWNER LIKE MYSELF AS
A LONG TERM RESIDENT IN THE
CITY IN LONG TERM RESIDENT AND
LONG TERM HOMEOWNER, WHAT WILL
IT TAKE TO HELP A HOMEOWNER
LIKE MYSELF AGE IN PLACE IN A
NEIGHBORHOOD THAT I LOVE AND
BUILD ADDITIONAL UNITS IN MY
PROPERTY THAT ARE AFFORDABLE
WITHOUT THE NEED FOR SUBSIDY TO
FAMILIES LIKE THESE WONDERFUL
PEOPLE HERE WHO ARE ESSENTIAL
WORKERS IN OUR CITY?
YOU KNOW ALL OF THE COMMENTS
THAT SARAH SARAH LAWRENCE MADE
WERE VERY REASONABLE AND
SOMETHING THAT OUR CITY COULD
ACCOMMODATE.
I HEAR THE COMMENTS MADE BY THE
THE PLANNER AND I THINK SOME
OF THOSE ALSO CAN BE
ACCOMMODATED.
FOR EXAMPLE, OTHER CITIES WILL
RECORD THESE DISTINCTIONS SO
THAT SO THAT THEY CAN KEEP THEY
CAN TRACK THE SALES AND ENFORCE
THE DEED RESTRICTION MECHANISM.
THERE'S NO REASON WHY ANN ARBOR
COULDN'T ADOPT SOMETHING
SIMILAR.
THERE'S NOTHING WRITTEN THAT
THAT CAN CHANGE OTHER CITIES
LIKE SEATTLE PORTLAND ARE
TAKING STEPS TO INCREASE THE
NUMBER OF USE AND ESPECIALLY
GIVE, YOU KNOW, WAIVERS AND
SPECIAL CONSIDERATION IF IT
WERE AFFORDABLE OR YOU KNOW,
MET MEASURABLE SUSTAINABILITY
STANDARDS AND SO ON.
I DON'T AGAIN I DON'T SEE WHY
ANN ARBOR COULDN'T ADOPT
SIMILAR SIMILAR MEASURES AND I
THINK VERY IMPORTANT CITIES ARE
RECOGNIZING THE NEED TO ALLOW A
SEPARATE SALE OF THESE
SECONDARY UNITS.
YOU ALLOW CONDO IZATION AND
THEN IF IF FOR EXAMPLE, AN
ORGANIZATION LIKE THE ANN ARBOR
COMMUNITY LAND TRUST OWNED THE
LAND THE
LAND WOULD BE
ESSENTIALLY HELD WHILE THE
HOMES COULD BE SOLD.
SO THAT'S ANOTHER MECHANISM FOR
THAT'S IN ADDITION TO A CONDO
KIND OF REGIME THAT WOULD THAT
WOULD MAKE ENABLE COMMUNITY AS
WELL AS HOME OWNERSHIP.
SO I URGE YOU ALL TO CONSIDER
THIS PROPOSAL NOW THIS
AMENDMENT NOW AND REALLY WORK
TO SHARPEN IT AND ENHANCE IT AS
YOU THINK ABOUT TO
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN DIVISION,
THANK YOU FOR YOUR ATTENTION.
>> THANK YOU.
I'D LIKE TO BRIEFLY VOICE
SUPPORT FOR THIS AMENDMENT.
I THINK IT TRULY ADDRESSES THE
MISSING MIDDLE AND THIS IS A
WAY TO PRIORITIZE THE VERY
PEOPLE WHO WORK TO SERVE US AND
OUR NEEDS IN OUR COMMUNITY.
I COMPLETELY UNDERSTAND THE
ADMINISTRATIVE PANDORA'S BOX
THIS OPENS BUT I HOPE THERE IS
A WAY AS WE THINK ABOUT THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THAT DOES
GIVE PRIORITY TO THE COMMUNITY
LAND TRUST AS IT'S COMPETING
WITH PRIVATE DEVELOPERS FOR
THOSE REASONS.
SO I ALSO THINK BACK TO THE I
THINK THE SECOND TO LAST SLIDE
IS THERE A WAY THAT WE COULD
STREAMLINE OR WAIVE PERMITTING
FEES FOR REZONING THINGS LIKE
THAT?
SOME OF THE THINGS WE'VE TALKED
ABOUT FOR OTHER DEVELOPERS I
WONDER IF WE COULD DO A PILOT
PROJECT WITH THE COMMUNITY LAND
TRUST TO UNDERSTAND IF THAT
ACTUALLY REDUCES COSTS, GET
FEEDBACK THAT WAY.
SO THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
HI MY NAME IS SARAH AND I
CURRENTLY LIVE IN PITTSFIELD
TOWNSHIP.
I WORK AS AN EDUCATOR FOR
ALMOST TEN YEARS FIVE YEARS IN
A FREE SCHOOL AND FOR THE LAST
FOUR YEARS I WAS A TEACHER IN
APS AND WAS AN INTERMEDIATE
SCHOOL DISTRICT AS A SPECIAL ED
TEACHER ASSISTANT SO I LIKE
MANY EDUCATORS I LOVE THIS
COMMUNITY BUT THE REALITY IS
THAT I CAN'T AFFORD A HOME HERE
AND THAT MIGHT HINDER MY
ABILITY TO KEEP BEING ABLE TO
WORK HERE.
THAT'S WHY THE INTEREST WOULD
BE SO LIFE CHANGING FOR ME IT'S
OFFER A PATH TO OFFER AN
AFFORDABLE PATH TO
HOMEOWNERSHIP WHICH ISN'T
SOMETHING I COULD I COULD EVER
ACHIEVE ON MY OWN AND IT WOULD
ALLOW ME TO STAY ROOTED HERE
AND SERVE THE STUDENTS THAT I
LOVE TO SERVE AND YEAH, SO I
REALLY HOPE THAT YOU DO
CONSIDER THIS OPPORTUNITY.
THANK YOU
.
>> HELLO AGAIN TOM STUHLBARG
ONE TWO ZERO TWO TRAILER STREET
.
I'M USUALLY A STICKLER FOR THE
RULES ZONING AS YOU KNOW
BECAUSE I'VE TALKED ABOUT IT
BEFORE.
I DO NOT DISAGREE WITH STAFF'S
REPORT.
I ALSO FOLLOW THIS AT THE ZIBA
WHEN THEY LOOKED AT VARIANCES
ANOTHER ALTERNATIVE METHOD AND
I DON'T DISAGREE WITH MR.
BARRETT THAT STAFF'S REPORT
EITHER.
SO WHAT DO WE DO?
HOW DO WE MAKE THIS HAPPEN?
THIS IS A DIRECT SOLUTION.
I'M ALWAYS TALKING ABOUT DIRECT
SOLUTIONS AS OPPOSED TO
INDIRECT SOLUTIONS.
THIS IS THE ONLY THING GOING
REALLY TO GET A TABLE HOUSING
FOR OWNERSHIP.
WE HAVE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
THAT'S BEING MET IN CERTAIN
WAYS THAT TENDS TO BE OUR
RENTAL.
THIS PROVIDES ATTAINABLE HOME
OWNERSHIP.
THIS ALLOWS THESE PEOPLE TO NOT
COMMUTE INTO THE CITY.
THERE'S SO MUCH GOOD THAT THIS
DOES.
SO HOW DO WE DO THIS IF WE WAIT
TO THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN WHICH
ALLOW MORE UNITS PER LOT THAT
SOLVES ONE PART OF IT BUT IT
DOESN'T SOLVE THE PROBLEM
BECAUSE THE UNCONDITIONAL
NATURE OF THE ZONING THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN MEANS THAT
THAT LAND WHETHER IT'S A HOUSE
OR A FEW VACANT PARCELS BUT A
HOUSE TO BE TORN DOWN MAYBE
WHATEVER IS THAT'S MUCH MORE
VALUABLE TO A DEVELOPER
OF HIGHER PRICED HOUSING.
THE ENTIRE COMMUNITY LAND TRUST
GETS OUTBID BY A CRAZY AMOUNT
ONCE THIS COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
PASSES IT'S ALREADY CHALLENGED
AND BEING OUTBID FOR LOTS RIGHT
NOW.
SO HOW DO WE GET FROM HERE TO
THERE?
I'M GOING TO THROW SOMETHING
THAT IS AN IDEA SINCE THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IS GOING TO
BE FOLLOWED DOWN, WE'RE
CHANGING THE WHOLE CITY.
WE HAVE NEW ZONING CATEGORIES
ARE GOING TO BE WRITTEN A NEW
ZONING LAW THAT'S GOING TO BE
WRITTEN AND THAT'S GOING TO BE
THAT ADOPTED.
YOU COULD WIPE THIS OUT
ESSENTIALLY SUNSET WHATEVER YOU
DO RIGHT NOW WE HAVE AN
ORGANIZATION, A NONPROFIT
THAT'S GOT BUYERS READY.
THEY'VE GONE THROUGH THE TIF
APPROVAL PROCESS WITH THE
COUNTY.
THEY'VE GOT EVERYTHING LINED UP
TO MAKE THIS HAPPEN AND DELIVER
ATTAINABLE HOUSING NOW TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE TWENTY TWENTY SIX
MAYBE TWENTY TWENTY SEVEN
BEFORE THE NEW ZONING LAW GOES
INTO EFFECT.
IF YOU DON'T LIKE WHERE THIS IS
GOING, IF YOU DON'T LIKE THE
DOORS IT OPENS UP THE BACK
DOORS IT MIGHT OPEN UP WHICH IS
SOMETHING TO BE SERIOUSLY
CONCERNED ABOUT AND ZONING WITH
WHAT COULD HAPPEN, WHAT COULD
OTHER PEOPLE DO?
YOU JUST TURN IT OFF AND
WHATEVER IT'S BEEN BUILT IN THE
NEXT COUPLE OF YEARS MIGHT BE
ALL THAT GETS BUILT BUT YOU'RE
A LOWER RISK BECAUSE YOU'RE
ALREADY REWRITING THE WHOLE
ZONING CODE AND MAYBE BY THEN
YOU FIGURE OUT A WAY TO WRITE
IT INTO THE ZONING CODE SO THAT
SOME OF THE WORRIES AND
CONCERNS ARE FIGURED OUT BY
THEN.
BUT RIGHT NOW YOU'VE GOT A
NONPROFIT THAT'S ABLE TO
DELIVER HOMES.
>> YOU'VE GOT PEOPLE TO MOVE
INTO THOSE HOMES.
IT'S SO CLOSE.
>> SO USE YOUR CREATIVITY,
FIGURE OUT HOW TO MAKE IT
HAPPEN.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU, MR. STOLER.
HELLO.
I'M STILL BRIAN CHAMBERS.
TWENTY FIFTEEN.
NO WAY.
THIRD WARD TURN COMMISSIONERS.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME ON THIS
IMPORTANT MATTER WHICH ADVANCES
AND ITS ABILITY TO FOSTER
COMMUNITY BASED AFFORDABLE
HOUSING OWNERSHIP RIGHT NOW I
WANT TO EMPHASIZE WHY THE LAND
TRUST AMENDMENT MUST MOVE
FORWARD NOW AND NOT YEARS FROM
NOW WHEN THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
REWRITE IS COMPLETE STATS
RECOMMENDATIONS TO DENY OR
PETITION REST ON THREE MAIN
POINTS THAT A SEVENTEEN HUNDRED
SQUARE APPROPRIATELY MODIFIED
APPRECIATE WHAT SERIOUS
COMMITTER IDU CONFLICTS WITH
THE DEFINITION OF ACCESSORY
THAT DEED RESTRICTIONS ARE
UNENFORCED AND THAT DENSITY
CHANGES SHOULD WAIT FOR THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
RESPECTFULLY I SEE THESE
DIFFERENTLY FIRST SIZE AND
SCALE STARFURY THAT OUR HOMES
WOULD BLUR THE LINE BETWEEN
ACCESSORY AND PRIMARY IN
PRACTICE ARE ANY ANTONIE MODELS
ARE SMALLER THAN MANY NEW
SINGLE FAMILY HOMES BEING BUILT
IN ANN ARBOR TODAY THEY MIRROR
THE BELOVED TWO STOREY HOMES
OF OLD ANN ARBOR.
WELL WITHIN NEIGHBORHOOD
CHARACTER WHILE AVOIDING THE
LARGE LUXURY SCALE HOUSES THAT
ARE RAPIDLY REPLACING MODEST
ONES.
AS WE DISCUSSED EARLIER SECOND
ON DEED RESTRICTIONS, STEPH
CAUTIONS THAT THE CITY LACKS
THE ABILITY TO ENFORCE
PERMANENT AFFORDABILITY.
THAT'S EXACTLY WHY COMMUNITY
LAND TRUST EXISTS NATIONWIDE.
KELTY'S IN PLACES LIKE MADISON,
BURLINGTON, DURHAM AND OTHERS
THAT HAVE HAD STEWARDED
THOUSANDS OF PERMANENTLY
AFFORDABLE HOMES FOR DECADES.
>> ENFORCEMENT IS NOT A BURDEN
ON THE CITY.
IT'S BUILT INTO THE MISSION AND
GOVERNANCE OF THE LAND TRUST ON
THE AID TO KELTIE BOARD WITH
HOMEOWNER AND CITY
REPRESENTATION ONCE THE HOMES
ARE OCCUPIED IT'S DESIGNED TO
INSURE THOSE HOMES REMAIN
AFFORDABLE FOREVER AND THE DEED
RESTRICTIONS ARE MAINTAINED.
THIRD, ON WAITING FOR THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN WE FULLY
SUPPORT THE PLANNING PROCESS
BUT WE CANNOT WAIT UNTIL TWENTY
TWENTY EIGHT OR TWENTY TWENTY
NINE FOR NEW ZONING.
FAMILIES ARE READY NOW
TEACHERS, NURSES, YOUNG
FAMILIES YOU'VE HEARD FROM THEM
HERE SPEAK PERSONALLY.
FINANCING IS READY NOW BANKS
AND INDIVIDUAL LENDERS SUPPORT
PROJECTS BUT HESITATE WITH
REZONING WITHOUT THIS AMENDMENT
THESE ZONES MAY NOT GET BUILT
50 HOMES A YEAR FIVE YEARS
BEFORE THEY CAN GO AND THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN DOES PLAN.
HOW MUCH HOUSING ARE YOU
WILLING TO DENY IN ANN ARBOR
STAF ALSO SUGGEST REZONING TO A
IS THE ALTERNATIVE ZONING.
>> IT'S COST TIME AND
UNCERTAINTY AS YOU'VE HEARD WE
KNOW ANN ARBOR IS NOT ALONE.
I'M RUSHING AT NINETEEN SECONDS
HERE.
PORTLAND AND OREGON ALLOWED
DUPLEXES DRY PLACES ON SINGLE
FAMILY LOTS.
MADISON HAS A DIRECTLY
PARTNERSHIP WITH THE MADISON
AREA COMMUNITY LAND TRUST AND
THEY'VE BEEN DOING IT FOR YEARS
AND SINGLE FAMILY
NEIGHBORHOODS.
WHAT WERE PREVIOUSLY SO
COMMISSIONERS' TONIGHT YOU HAD
THE CHANCE TO ACT BY APPROVING
AN ORDINANCE FOR PERMANENTLY
AFFORDABLE HOMEOWNERSHIP AT
SCALE YOU'LL INSURE HOMES ARE
DELIVERING MR. CHAMBERS ROOTED
IN OUR NEIGHBORHOODS AND
AVAILABLE TO THE PEOPLE MAKE
STRONG YOU CAN DO IT.
THANK YOU SO HI BEVERLY FLY
FROM TUZER LONG GARDEN CIRCLE
IN ANN ARBOR AS I SPOKE BEFORE
OUR HOMES THERE ARE 12 HOMES OR
TEN HOMES IN OUR LOCK UP IN OUR
CIRCLE THEY WERE BUILT BY THE
ANN ARBOR HOUSING COMMISSION
SEVENTY YEARS AGO.
FIFTY THOUSAND DOLLARS THREE
FOUR BEDROOM HOMES.
THEY'RE BASED ALL AROUND ANN
ARBOR THAT MADE IT AFFORDABLE
FOR PEOPLE WHO WERE NOT
EDUCATED OR NOT MARRIED OR WHO
HAPPENED TO NOT HAVE ENOUGH
MONEY TO AFFORD A HOME.
MY PARENTS BOUGHT THEIR HOME
THAT I STAY NOW FOR FIFTY
THOUSAND DOLLARS.
THEIR HOME WAS WORTH TWO
HUNDRED TO THREE HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS NOW BUT IF IT
HADN'T BEEN FOR THE HOUSING
COMMISSION AND PLACES LIKE
COMMUNITY LAND WHERE WOULD WE
BE?
WHERE WOULD WE BE?
I THINK THAT THE BOARD SHOULD
GET TOGETHER AND TRY TO FIND A
WAY TO MAKE THIS POSSIBLE.
THESE PEOPLE HAVE ALREADY BEEN
WORKING ON THIS FOR SIX YEARS
ANOTHER SIX YEARS IT'LL BE
IMPOSSIBLE WITH ALL THE ZONING
AND ALL THE CHANGES THAT ARE
GOING ON IN ANN ARBOR.
IT'S JUST FORCING FAMILIES WHO
WANT TO BE IN ANN ARBOR GOOD
FAMILIES WHO THEIR KIDS GO TO
SCHOOL AND THE NEIGHBORHOODS
ARE NICE.
THEY HAVE PARKS, THEY HAVE
TREES, THEY HAVE STORES THEY
CAN WALK TO AND TO HAVE SOME
PRIDE ABOUT THEMSELVES AND
OWNING A HOME SO THANK YOU GUYS
COULD TRY TO WORK TOGETHER TO
TRY TO GET THE LINGO RIGHT AND
TRY TO HELP US GET APPROVED.
THANK YOU
.
ANYONE ELSE IN THE CHAMBER
?
>> THANK YOUR WIFE.
YOU CAN GO OVER AGAIN AT THE
RISK OF MUDDYING THE WATERS,
I'D LIKE TO PROPOSE TENTATIVELY
PROPOSE A FRIENDLY AMENDMENT TO
THIS AMENDMENT TO THE UDC AND
THIS ACTUALLY NO, I'M JUST
COMING TO THIS TOPIC SO THIS
MAY MAY MAKE NO SENSE TO MY
FRIENDS WHO'S BEEN WORKING ON
THIS PROJECT FOR YEARS BUT IT
OCCURRED TO ME THAT THE MAJOR
OBJECTION OF STAFF AT THE NRC
MEETING ON THIS WAS THAT IT
WOULDN'T JUST BE AN OPPORTUNITY
LAND TRUST THAT WOULD BE TAKING
ADVANTAGE OF THIS AND WE REALLY
THERE MIGHT BE UNINTENDED
CONSEQUENCES WHICH I INFERRED
TO BE A CASE OF SOMEONE WITH A
LONG STANDING SMALL HOME IN ANN
ARBOR DECIDING THAT THEY WOULD
BUILD A SEVENTEEN HUNDRED
SQUARE FOOT UNIT WOULD ON THIS
ONE LOT AND THEN THE CITY WOULD
HAVE TROUBLE ENFORCING THE
AFFORDABILITY COVENANTS AND
EVENTUALLY IT COULD BE SOLD AT
MARKET RATE.
IT WOULD JUST BE A MESS.
AND SO THAT'S THE MAIN
OBJECTION I HEARD AT THE NOW WE
HEARD IT FROM MR. RENT.
I DON'T KNOW IF YOU CAUGHT IT
BUT THESE BUILDINGS ARE
DESIGNED TO BE ALL ELECTRIC.
OBVIOUSLY THAT CAUGHT MY
ATTENTION.
I HAD KNOWN THIS FOR A WHILE
THIS ANY DESIGN AND THAT'S TO
THEIR CREDIT THEY UNDERSTAND
THE CLIMATE IMPERATIVE.
WHY NOT ADD A NO GAS
REQUIREMENT TO THE AIDOO
AMENDMENT?
SO IN THAT CASE VERY FEW
EXISTING HOMES IN ANN ARBOR DO
NOT HAVE A GAS CONNECTION
VANISHINGLY FEW.
SO THIS WOULD SERVE TO
EFFECTIVELY LIMIT THE
APPLICABILITY OF THIS AMENDMENT
TO THE ACT PROJECT WHICH I
THINK WAS A MAJOR CONCERN
OF STAFF AND SO THE YOU KNOW,
THE WORDING WOULD JUST READ FOR
LOTS WERE BOTH THE PRINCIPLE
DWELLING UNIT AND THE ACCESSORY
DWELLING UNIT ARE DEED
RESTRICTED TO REMAIN
PERMANENTLY AFFORDABLE TO
HOUSEHOLDS AT OR BELOW THE AREA
MEDIAN INCOME AND WHERE NEITHER
DWELLING UNIT HAS A NATURAL GAS
CONNECTION.
THAT'S MY ADDITION THE ADA YOU
MAY HAVE A MAXIMUM GROSS FOR
AREA OF SEVENTEEN HUNDRED
SQUARE FEET AGAIN THIS MAY NOT
MAKE SENSE.
I'M JUST PUTTING IT FORWARD AS
A TRIAL BALLOON.
I GENERALLY AGREE WITH MR.
STALBERG THAT THE RISKS ARE FEW
BY GOING AHEAD WITH THE
AMENDMENT AS WRITTEN BECAUSE
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN MAY MAKE
THIS WHOLE SUBJECT MOOT IN THE
LONG RUN AND IN GENERAL I
SUPPORT WHATEVER FORM OF THIS
AMENDMENT YOU CHOOSE TO
CONSIDER TONIGHT.
I GENERALLY AGREE WITH MR.
ADAMS POSITION THAT THE POLICY
AND I WANT TO SEE THIS GO
FORWARD IN ANY FORM.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
MR. GARBER, CAN YOU GIVE ME
YOUR AMENDMENT AGAIN?
JUST THE PLACEMENT OF COURSE
AFTER AREA MEDIAN INCOME INSERT
AND WE'RE NEITHER DWELLING UNIT
HAS A NATURAL GAS LINE
CONNECTION.
>> THANK YOU SIR.
IS THERE ANYONE ELSE IN THE
CHAMBER WHO'D LIKE TO ADDRESS
THE COMMISSION
?
DO WE HAVE ONLINE PARTICIPANTS
WE CAN COME BACK TO FOLKS
?
INSIDE IF WE NEED TO DO THANK
WE CAN COME BACK TO FOLKS
YOU
DENHA OR JACOB PROSTATIC.
>> YOU MAY NOW UNMUTED AND
ADDRESS THE PLANNING COMMISSION
.
THANKS EVERYONE.
SO MANY GREAT COMMENTS MORE
ELOQUENT THAN I CAN PUT
TOGETHER BY JUST ONE TO ONE TO
SUPPORT THE MEASURE AND HOPE
FOR ITS APPROVAL.
>> THANK YOU
ALEX LOWE.
YOU MAY NOW AND MUTE IN ADDRESS
THE PLANNING COMMISSION.
>> HI THIS IS ALEX LOGAN.
THERE ARE BASICALLY TWO TYPES
OF CONCERNS FROM STAFF THAT I
HEARD THAT I WOULD LIKE TO
ADDRESS FIRST IS THE QUESTION
OF THE FINANCIAL AFFORDABILITY
AND THE SECOND THE QUESTION THE
SIZE OF AN IDEA ON THE FORMER
HAD SAID THAT THE SUPPORT TO
DEAL WITH THAT IS VERY MUCH TO
MR. SOLBERG'S POINT.
WE HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY TO PILOT
SOMETHING THAT CAN BE CHANGED
WITHIN THE NEW DC.
SO IF THE AFFORDABLE
ENFORCEABILITY OF PERMANENT
PORTABILITY IS A PROBLEM, WE
COULD DROP THAT REQUIREMENT AND
USE THE NEXT FEW YEARS TO
DETERMINE WHETHER THE INITIAL
PUBLIC TO LIMIT IT IS ACTUALLY
SOMETHING THAT WE NEED TO TAKE
INTO ACCOUNT AND THE SIZE OF AN
EDU I DON'T UNDERSTAND WHY IT
SHOULD BE LIMITED TO ANYTHING
OTHER THAN BEING SMALLER THAN
THE PRIMARY ON THAT PROPERTY.
I ALSO DON'T SEE WHY I CAN'T
HAVE MULTIPLE EIGHTEENS.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
LUIS VASQUEZ.
>> YOU CAN NOW UNMUTED AND
ADDRESS THE PLANNING COMMISSION
.
THANK YOU.
LOSE THOSE AS THE NAMES ARE AN
IMPORTANT TRIBE IN GENERAL
SUPPORT OF THIS AMENDMENT AND
INCLUDING MR GARBER'S AMENDMENT
TO THE AMENDMENT I UNDERSTAND
THE PLANNING STAFF'S CONCERNS
AS STATED DURING THE REPORT BUT
I THINK THIS REALLY UNDERSCORES
THE NEED TO GET THROUGH THE
COMPRE OF LAND USE PROCESS
WITHOUT DELAY.
YOU KNOW MR STONEBURNER
TONIGHT'S GAME BUT HE HAS A
FOLLOWS THE PLAN SIGN IN FRONT
OF IT MANY PROPERTIES THAT HE
OWNS AROUND TOWN WHILE THIS IS
COMING BACK TO BITE IN THE
TOM, YOU KNOW WE REALLY NEED TO
GET THE PLAN DONE AND
PROVISIONS LIKE THIS THAT
SUPPORT THE COMMUNITY LAND
TRUST NEED TO BE BUILT IN AND
EMPHASIZED.
SO THAT'S ALL I WANT TO SAY.
THANK YOU.
SPEAKER.
THANK YOU
LISA JAVINS.
>> YOU MAY NOW AND YOU CAN
ADDRESS THE PLANNING COMMISSION
.
>> HI THIS IS LISA GEBEN TEN
FIFTY FOR MARTIN PLACE.
>> I'M KIND OF STRUCK BY THE
IRONY HERE THAT I'VE SEEN IN
RECENT YEARS WHERE THE PLANNING
COMMISSION HAS IGNORED THEIR
REPORTS TO APPROVE LUXURY
STUDENTS HIGH RISE TO THE AND
THOSE IN THE FACE OF COMMUNITY
DISAPPROVAL.
THIS IS SOMETHING PEOPLE DO
APPROVE OF THE WAITING UNTIL
AFTER THE PLAN IS APPROVED
POSSIBLY SEVERAL YEARS FROM NOW
EVEN IF HITTING THE DLT AGAINST
PRIVATE SPECULATORS AND THEY
WILL LOSE THIS CLP, NOT THE
SPECULATORS THE COMMUNITY LAND
TRUST IS EXACTLY THE TYPE
OF THING RECOMMENDED BY THE
COUNTY HOUSING REPORT THAT WAS
RECENT REALLY AND REFERENCED
EARLIER BY COMMENTERS AND IN
CASE ANY OF THE MEMBER OF THE
PUBLIC HAS NOT LOOKED AT THAT
HOUSING REPORT, PLEASE GO TO
THE WEBSITE OF THE ANN ARBOR
AREA COMMUNITY FOUNDATION.
THE DATA IS FANTASTIC AND THE
REPORT IS USER FRIENDLY AND
THIS IS THE MAIN PROPONENT THAT
THOSE PROFESSIONALS HAVE
RECOMMENDED FOR US IN THE INNER
HARBOR AND I SUPPORT IT.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
BRANDON DEADMAU5.
YOU CAN NOW UNMUTED AND ADDRESS
THE PLANNING COMMISSION AND ON
TOP OF THAT ONE FOUR ZERO ONE
HARP'S STREET WHICH IS JUST TWO
BLOCKS FROM A LOT BUT THE
COMMUNITY LAND TRUST HAS BOUGHT
BUT HAS BEEN UNABLE TO DEVELOP
AS A RESULT OF CURRENT ZONING
.
AND I THINK WE ALL AGREE THAT
FIXING ZONING AND FINISHING THE
COMP PLAN IS YOU THE CORRECT
WAY OF SOLVING THIS PROBLEM.
I THINK A PATCH LIKE THIS TO
TRY OUT SOMETHING NEW AND SEE
WHAT HAPPENS IS A REASONABLE
APPROACH HERE.
>> YOU KNOW, I YEAH, SOMETHING
WEIRD MIGHT HAPPEN BUT WE'RE
REWRITING ALL THIS STUFF VERY
SOON.
IT FEELS WEIRD FOR ME TO AGREE
WITH WITH SOME OF THE PEOPLE I
USUALLY DISAGREE WITH OUR
HOUSING POLICY BUT LIKE YEAH,
WE GOT TO TRY SOMETHING
BUILDING 50 HOMES A YEAR AND
OPENING UP THIS OPPORTUNITY TO
OTHERS WHO CAN CAN COME UP WITH
A SIMILAR MODEL AND PROVIDE
HOUSING FOR DESPERATELY NEED
HOUSING FOR PEOPLE SEEMS VERY
REASONABLE TO GIVE IT A SHOT SO
DOWNTOWN CAN BE PRETTY PRETTY
PRETTY SMALL ON THE UPSIDE.
I THINK IT'S WORTH IT THOUGH.
>> I WOULD ASK YOU TO SUPPORT
THAT.
THANK YOU.
PHONE NO ENDING FOR SIX FOUR
YOU CAN NOW AND AND ADDRESS THE
PLANNING COMMISSION BUT CAN YOU
HEAR ME.
YES WE CAN THANK YOU.
>> I WASN'T SURE TO BE ARE I
DON'T HAVE ANYTHING TO TALK
HAPPENED BUT I WANT TO GIVE MY
WHOLEHEARTED SUPPORT WITH
EVERYBODY EVERYBODY WHO SPOKE
IN SUPPORT AND I ESPECIALLY
WANT TO ECHO WHAT I WAS
COMFORTABLE AND BRIAN CHAMBERS
SAID PRETTY MUCH EVERYTHING
EVERYBODY EXPECTED FROM THERE
TO RATIONALE FOR HOW WE COULD
GO ABOUT IT DESPITE TREPIDATION
AND PERSONAL I MUST SAY THAT I
REMEMBER THE OBSTACLES BUT YOU
CAN OVERCOME THEM ALL.
YOU BEND OVER BACKWARDS TO A
VERY WEALTHY DEVELOPER REQUEST
AND TALK ABOUT HOW UNSEEMLY IT
WOULD BE THAT TO GRANT WHATEVER
THEY WANT TO DO THE SAME THING
RIGHT FOR THE COMMUNITY LAND
TRUST IN THE NEED TO STRENGTHEN
SUPPORT FOR COMMUNITY RANCHERS
IN GENERAL IN THE TO PROVE YOU
CAN LET THE FABULOUS COMMUNITY
LAND WILL STILL BE THE AND
OTHERS HAVE INITIATED COME TO
FRUITION AS SOON AS POSSIBLE.
CREEK AND THE OTHER ONE SAY TO
ME THAT MR. BENSCHOP AND OTHER
ASTROPHOTOGRAPHY THREE OR FOUR
OTHERS LIKE THEM WHO WANT TO
CALL AND SUPPORT THE PLAN AND I
HOPE THAT YOU SEE MANY OF THOSE
PEOPLE WHO WILL CALL FOR HELP
AND DEPEND UPON THE CHURCH CAN
FACILITATE MORE ACCESSIBLE,
AFFORDABLE MANY OF US PROPERTY
THAT THE PARKING LOT AND THE
FACILITY MORE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
IT'S GOING TO FACILITATE THE
ACCESS OF SOMEBODY WITH THE
CORPORATE BUYOUT OF BEING
HOUSING AND THAT'S OUT WHAT WE
WANT TO SUPPORT IN EVERYTHING
THAT'S ASKING YOU TO DO AND
THANK YOU
, ANTHONY DIVI YOU CAN
NOW MUTE AND ADDRESS THE
PLANNING COMMISSION.
I THANK YOU MY NAME ANTHONY TO
BE TWO FOUR THREE FOUR ALLWOOD
CIRCLE AND OVER MICHIGAN I'M A
LIBRARY WORKER AND I'M JUST
CALLING IN TO SUPPORT
EVERYTHING SARAH SAID FOR THE
NUMBER COMMUNITY LAND TRUST.
I'M ACTUALLY ONE OF THE FOLKS
THAT HAVE A HOME RESERVED ON
JEWITT SO I WOULD BENEFIT FROM
THIS IF THIS WERE TO MOVE
FORWARD.
I JUST ASKED TO HELP THEM GET
WHATEVER THEY NEEDED APPROVED
TO HELP EXPEDITE THE PROCESS IN
ANY WAY THEY CAN.
IT JUST IT DOESN'T FEEL HOPEFUL
THAT MYSELF OR ANY OF THESE
OTHER PEOPLE SPOKE TONIGHT WILL
BE ABLE TO GET A HOME I DON'T
KNOW, FOUR OR FIVE YEARS THAT
GOES THAT IF WE HAVE TO WAIT
FOR THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN TO
TO PASS.
>> BUT I JUST KEEP IT BRIEF.
I DO APPRECIATE ALL YOUR WORK
INTO LOOKING INTO THIS AND
THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME AND
YOUR WORK HERE.
THANK YOU
.
>> ADAM GEDMIN.
YOU CAN NOW UNMUTED ADDRESS THE
PLANNING COMMISSION BY ADAM
GOODMAN FOUR HUNDRED VIRGINIA
AVENUE.
I JUST WANTED TO QUICKLY NOTE
THAT FOR EXAMPLE, SAN DIEGO,
CALIFORNIA DOES ALLOW MULTIPLE
TO USE PALLOT AND AN INCREASING
NUMBER IPSUM RATIO OF THEM ARE
DEEMED RESTRICTED TO BE
AFFORDABLE.
SO THERE IS A THERE IS SOME
PRECEDENT FOR THIS SORT
OF THING IN THIS COUNTRY AND B
I THINK WHAT IS REFERRING TO IS
ACTUALLY A REALLY LIKE MINOR
TWEAK COMPARED TO WHAT POLICIES
ARE BEING IMPLEMENTED BY CITIES
THAT ACTUALLY HAVE PROGRESSIVE
VISION FOR HEALTH HAZARD POLICY
.
SO I REALLY SEE NO REASON WHY
YOU SHOULDN'T JUST APPROVE THIS
.
AND THE OTHER THING I'D ADD IS
THAT AT LEAST SOME OF THESE
THINGS I WISH THEY COULD APPLY
TO ALL IT IS FOR EXAMPLE NOT
COUNTING THE BASEMENT AS PART
OF THE FLOOR AREA LIMIT.
I MEAN, YOU KNOW, IT IS
BASICALLY IMPOSSIBLE TO BUILD
AN YOU WITH THE BASEMENT.
WHY SHOULD THAT BE THE CASE AT
ALL?
THAT'S ALL THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
THOSE ARE ALL THE HANDS RAISED
AT THIS TIME.
GREAT.
AT THIS POINT I WILL CLOSE THE
PUBLIC HEARING, READ THE MOTION
THAT IS BEFORE US THE ANN ARBOR
CITY PLANNING COMMISSION HEREBY
RECOMMENDS THAT THE MAYOR AND
CITY COUNCIL APPROVE THE
FOLLOWING AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER
FIFTY FIVE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT
CODE SECTION FIVE POINT SIXTEEN
POINT SIX POINT D ACCESSORY
DWELLING UNIT ADD SUBSECTION
SEVEN TO ALLOW TO USE WITH A
MAXIMUM GROSS FLOOR AREA OF ONE
THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED SQUARE
FEET IF BOTH THE PRINCIPLE UNIT
AND AIDO ARE DEEMED RESTRICTED
TO REMAIN PERMANENTLY
AFFORDABLE TO HOUSEHOLDS AT OR
BELOW THE AREA MEDIUM INCOME
MOVE BY COMMISSIONER M.
SECONDED BY COMMISSIONER DISH
WE ARE IN DISCUSSION WHO'D LIKE
TO KICK US OFF COMMISSIONER.
THANK YOU.
I HAVE SO MANY QUESTIONS BUT I
AM GOING TO TRY AND SEE THE
MIKE AT SOME POINT I'LL JUST
OPEN BY SAYING I'M INCREDIBLY
SUPPORTIVE OF ATIQULLAH.
I THINK I HOPEFULLY YOU KNOW
THAT AND BUT I HAVE A LOT
OF QUESTIONS AND I THINK IT'S
REALLY INTERESTING.
IT'S JUST LOOK, IT'S AN
INTERESTING CASE WHERE THE
MISSION, THE VALUES AND THE
VISION ARE COMING UP AGAINST
THE ADMINISTRATION, THE
BUREAUCRACY OR THE THE
LEGISLATION, THE ENFORCEMENT.
SO WHAT I WOULD HOPE IS THAT WE
CAN FIGURE TO WAY THROUGH THIS
BUT I THINK THERE ARE SOME
IMPORTANT QUESTIONS TO ANSWER.
SO MAYBE JUST SOMEONE TO BEGIN
WITH A FEW FACTFINDING
QUESTIONS.
CAN YOU HELP ME OR DO YOU KNOW
WHAT THE AVERAGE OR TYPICAL LOT
SIZE IS THE LOTS THAT YOU ARE
BUILDING THESE ON?
WE CURRENTLY HAVE NINE PARCELS
FOR THESE FIRST TWENTY FOUR
HOMES TWO OF THE PARCELS WE
INTEND TO DO LAND DIVISION I
THINK SEVEN OF THE PARCELS ARE
OUR ONE B AND OUR ONE C WE HAVE
TWO PARCELS ON WAGGNER TWO THAT
ARE ONE D AND SO THOSE ARE THE
ONES THAT ARE RESTRICTED TO SIX
HUNDRED SQUARE FEET WHICH IS
PARTICULARLY PROBLEMATIC.
THAT'S THE ROOT OF MY QUESTION
REALLY IS LIKE WHETHER SO JUST
FOR PEOPLE WHO DON'T ALREADY
KNOW WE TALK ABOUT EIGHT
HUNDRED SQUARE BECAUSE THAT'S
MORE OFTEN THE CASE BUT IT CAN
BE CURRENTLY RESTRICTED SIX
HUNDRED FEET SO YOU HAVE TWO
THAT ARE SIX HUNDRED AND THE
REST WOULD BE AT THIS EIGHT
HUNDRED LIMIT YOU THINK ABOUT.
YES.
AND THEN MAYBE I'LL JUST ASK
YOU I'M GOING TO HAVE SOME
QUESTIONS OR STUFF BUT I'LL TRY
TO GET MY QUESTIONS TO YOU
FIRST SO THEN THERE ARE A WHOLE
LOT OF OTHER THINGS THAT
REGULATE THE AREA HIGH AND
PLACEMENT OF OF EIGHTY YEARS
BEYOND THE SQUARE FOOTAGE SO
THEY HAVE A DIFFERENT HEIGHT
LIMIT.
THEY HAVE DIFFERENT REGULATION
ABOUT HOW AND IN WHAT WAY THEY
CAN BE AND SETBACKS HOW MUCH
OF THE REAR SETBACK AREA THEY
CAN TAKE UP IF THEY'RE DETACHED
OR ATTACH SOME OF THOSE RULES
CHANGE.
SO I DON'T SEE ANY OF THAT IN
THIS CURRENT PROPOSAL AND I
DON'T KNOW WHAT TO DO WITH
THAT.
AND I WONDERED IF YOU HAVE
THOUGHT LIKE IT DOESN'T SEEM
LIKE YOU ARE ALSO PLANNING TO
OR DO THESE MEET THE TWENTY ONE
FOOT HEIGHT LIMIT OF AN
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE THEY WON'T
BE AS CUTE AS THE RENDERING
BECAUSE I THINK THE RENDERING
SHOW IS PROBABLY A BIT ABOVE
THE TWENTY ONE NORFORK CAN
BUILD IT WITH A LOWER ROOF
PITCH.
>> IT JUST WON'T BE AS
ATTRACTIVE.
THE SETBACKS THE ABILITY OF A
DETACHED AIDO TO BE BUILT IN
THE SET BACK IS ACTUALLY QUITE
HELPFUL SO THAT IS NICE AND
IT'S CURRENTLY OK SO HIGH YOU
LET'S JUST SAY YOU YOU WOULD
PLAN TO ABIDE BY THAT CURRENT
YOU'RE ASKING FOR A CHANGE IN
THE HEIGHT FOR ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES.
>> YOU KNOW THERE WERE JUST SO
MANY MOLES TO WHACK HERE I WAS
JUST TRYING TO GET GREAT
AND
THEN CURRENTLY ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES CAN'T BE IN THE
FRONT SET BACK.
>> I ASSUME THAT'S GOING TO BE
NOT A PROBLEM.
OK, AND FOR THE SIDE SET BACK
IF THEY'RE DETACHED THEY CAN BE
IN THE SIDE SET BACK AT NO
CLOSER THAN THREE FEET TO THE
SET TO THE LINE.
THAT'S OK.
AND FOR THE REAR STEP BACK THEY
ACTUALLY ALSO CAN BE IN THE
REAR STEP BACK NO CLOSER THAN
THREE FEET TO THE LINE BUT THEY
CAN'T TAKE UP MORE THAN THIRTY
FOUR MAYBE LESS THAN THIRTY
FIVE PERCENT OF THE REAR THAT
BACK AREA.
SO IS THAT A REQUIREMENT THAT
YOU ARE PREPARED FOR THE
CURRENT ONE WE HAVE WE'RE NOT
GOING TO USE THE REAR SETBACK
BACK IN THE FUTURE.
THERE MAY BE AN OCCASION WHERE
IT WOULD BE HELPFUL BUT WE'RE
PURPOSELY TRYING TO GO FOR THIS
MODEL THAT HAS A VERY SMALL
FOOTPRINT AND ONE OF THE OTHER
ISSUES IS THE IMPERVA
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE.
SO THIS HAS A SMALLER FOOTPRINT
THAT'S HELPFUL THERE AS WELL.
FOUNDATIONS ARE THE MOST
EXPENSIVE PART OF A STRUCTURE
TO BUILD AND SO THE SMALL
FOOTPRINT IS HELPFUL.
THEY'RE SO RIGHT NOW IT'S JUST
A NICE OPTION TO HAVE THE REAR
STEP BACK BUT WE'RE NOT FINDING
IT NECESSARY.
>> OK, I THINK IF THIS GOES
FORWARD AND YOU DO AND YOUR
PRESENTATION TO CITY COUNCIL BE
REALLY HELPFUL TO HAVE A SITE
PLAN THAT SHOWS OH WE HAVE ALL
THIS HOWLAND'S I MEAN TO SHOW
IT TO US BECAUSE IT HELPS GIVE
A SENSE OF JUST THE DENSITY ON
THE LOT RIGHT.
I'M SURE OF TWO HOMES ON OK I
HAVE A FEW QUESTIONS AND ONE
OTHER ONE FOR YOU.
I'M SORRY SO STOP SEEM TO BE
CONCERNED ABOUT THIS LIMITATION
ON THE NUMBER OF PERSONS THAT
CAN RESIDE ON THE LOT AND I
WANTED TO JUST GIVE YOU A
CHANCE TO ADDRESS THAT IF YOU
HAD COMMENTS ABOUT THIS
LIMITATION THAT BETWEEN THE TWO
HOMES YOU COULD NOT HAVE MORE
THAN FOUR UNRELATED ADULTS
LIVING THERE.
>> YEAH, THAT DOES NOT APPEAR
TO BE A PROBLEM.
UM, A LOT OF AS YOU CAN SEE, A
LOT OF THE HOME BUYERS THAT
WE'RE LOOKING TO ADDRESS ARE
YOUNG.
THEY HAVE SMALL HOUSEHOLDS OR
THEY ARE SINGLE PARENTS.
YOU'LL SEE FIRST TIME
HOMEBUYERS IN SINGLE HEAD
OF HOUSEHOLD OR QUITE HIGH.
AND SO WE'RE EXCITED TO BE ABLE
TO SERVE THESE HOME BUYERS AND
I RIGHT NOW DON'T SEE ANY
CONFLICTS WITH THAT.
>> AND THEN ONE MORE SORRY THE
AFFORDABILITY RESTRICTION WOULD
BE FOR BOTH STRUCTURES ON THE
LOT OR ONLY THE ONE THAT YOU
HAVE TAGGED AS THE ACCESSORY
STRUCTURE WE'RE OFFERING TO DO
BOTH AND THAT'S WHY WE'RE
ASKING FOR THE AVERAGE RMI
RIGHT NOW WITH THE TWENTY FOUR
HOMES THAT WE HAVE UNDER
RESURVEYED THE AVERAGE RMI
OF ALL OF THE HOUSEHOLDS IS
FIFTY NINE PERCENT.
SO WE THINK THAT THE HUNDRED
PERCENT THAT WE'RE OFFERING IS
QUITE GENEROUS AND THAT ALLOWS
US TO BUILD A HOME IF NEEDED IF
WE DON'T HAVE ANY SUBSIDY WE
COULD BUILD THE PRIMARY HOME AT
ONE HUNDRED PERCENT AM I OR
MAYBE ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY
PERCENT AM I AND THEN STILL
HAVE THE YOU AT A LOWER AM I
BUT OUR GOAL I MEAN WE'RE A
NONPROFIT DEVELOPER.
WE ARE COMMITTED TO OFFERING
HOMEOWNERSHIP TO OUR LOWEST
INCOME FULL TIME EMPLOYED AND
CRITICAL WORKERS WHO ARE MAKING
TWENTY DOLLARS AN HOUR AND
MAKING EARNING THIRTY FIVE
THOUSAND DOLLARS A YEAR.
>> WE THINK THEY DESERVE
HOMEOWNERSHIP.
OK GREAT THANKS.
A COUPLE OF QUESTIONS FIRST
SORRY CAN YOU PLEASE HELP US
JUST FOR ALL OF OUR EDIFICATION
DESCRIBE HOW AREA IS CALCULATED
CURRENTLY FOR AREA LIKE FOR A
HOUSE OR ANY TWO OR SO FLOOR
AREA IN A HOUSE I'M SORRY
PLANNER THATCHER CAN YOU SPEAK
A LITTLE CLOSER INTO YOUR
MICROPHONE SO FLOOR AREA IS
MEASURED WALL TO WALL, EXTERIOR
WALL TO EXTERIOR WALL.
>> IT DRAWS A BOX.
>> IT DOES NOT TYPICALLY
EXCLUDE ANYTHING AND BASEMENTS
ARE INCLUDED BECAUSE BASEMENTS
CAN BE FINISHED TO BE FINISHED
SPACE HABITABLE SPACE.
>> OK, THANK YOU.
I JUST WANTED TO BE CLEAR THAT
THE WAY THAT THIS IS BEING KIND
OF REWORDED WOULD ACTUALLY
REQUIRE US TO IF WE WERE GOING
TO DO THAT WE'D BE LIKE
REDEFINING HOW THE UDC MEASURES
FOR AREA.
SO I THINK WE SHOULD DO AN
APPLES TO APPLES COMPARISON.
AND THEN ONE OTHER QUESTION FOR
STAFF IS CAN YOU HELP ME
UNDERSTAND WHY A PARTNERSHIP
WITH AVALON IS A GOOD MODEL FOR
ENFORCING RENTAL AFFORDABILITY
WHICH IS MENTIONED IN THE STAFF
REPORT BUT THERE WOULDN'T BE
POSSIBLE TO DO IS THE REASON
WHY WE WOULDN'T BE ABLE TO DO A
PART PUBLIC PART PARTNERSHIP
WITH KELTIE TO ALLOW US TO
SIMILARLY ADMINISTER THAT AND
ENFORCE THAT JUST POPPED ON.
>> I WANT TO TALK ABOUT THAT.
THANKS TO THE COMMISSION.
SO A COUPLE A COUPLE OF WAYS
NOT ALWAYS BUT MORE TYPICALLY
WITH RENTAL UNITS SUCH AS OUR
HOUSING COMMISSION OR OTHERS
THERE IS SOMETIMES DOLLARS
INVOLVED AND WHEN WE HAVE A
MORTGAGE OR A FINANCIAL STAKE
IN THE PROJECT IT GIVES US MORE
ABILITY TO ENFORCE THAT NOT
ALWAYS THE CASE SOMETIMES IT IS
FRANKLY AN ECONOMY OF SCALE
WHERE WE HAVE QUITE A SIZABLE
NUMBER OF UNITS IN ONE LOCATION
THAT ALWAYS DOESN'T WORK
EITHER.
WE HAVE HAD EXPERIENCES WHERE
WE HAVE REQUIRED AFFORDABLE
UNITS AND AN OTHERWISE MARKET
DEVELOPMENT THAT HAS BEEN
INCREDIBLY CHALLENGING TO
ADMINISTER WHERE WE HAVE HAD
CIRCUMSTANCES OF HAVING TO GO
THROUGH FIFTY AROUND 50
APPLICANTS PER UNIT.
I'M TRYING TO BALANCE THE
REQUIREMENTS OF INCOME
SPECIFICATIONS WITH THE
EXPECTATIONS OF A PRIVATE
LANDLORD WHO MIGHT NOT BE
MISSION BASED.
SO IN THE CASE OF PARTICULARLY
WITH SCATTERED SITES WE DO HAVE
SOME EXAMPLES OF COVENANTS
ACROSS THE CITY IN DIFFERENT
PROJECTS.
THEY HAVE NOT WORKED
PARTICULARLY WELL.
THE CITY'S MECHANISM TO ENFORCE
THEM ARE MORE THERE.
THEY EXIST THROUGH THE COVENANT
BUT WHEN THEY DON'T AREN'T
SUCCESSFUL THE MECHANISMS FOR
US TO ENFORCE THAT ARE QUITE
DIFFICULT SOMETIMES THEY MIGHT
INVOLVE THE CITY'S PURCHASE
OF A UNIT UNDER A RIGHT
OF FIRST REFUSAL.
THIS HAS RECENTLY HAPPENED, FOR
EXAMPLE ON AN ASHLEY MEUS THAT
IS NOT A MODEL THAT I THINK THE
CITY CAN SUPPORT FINANCIALLY
OVER TIME.
SO FROLOV FOR FOR THOSE REASONS
A COMMUNITY LAND TRUST THERE
HAS BEEN A COMMUNITY
OF INTEREST IN THE PAST AND
WASHINGTON COUNTY I CERTAINLY
WISH THIS ONE SUCCESS.
I'M GRATEFUL THAT THEY ARE
THERE BUT I WANT TO BE CLEAR
THAT THE CITY'S I CANNOT
REPRESENT TO YOU OR THE CITY
COUNCIL THAT WE CAN ENSURE THE
LONG TERM VIABILITY OF THAT.
IN THIS CASE YOU HAVE A PARTNER
THAT IS WILLING TO TAKE THAT ON
WHICH IS TERRIFIC.
I JUST WANT TO BE CLEAR THAT
WHEN YOU ARE CONSIDERING AN
ALTERNATIVE USE OF A PROPERTY
THAT IS GOING TO COME WITHOUT
ASSURANCE THAT I CAN GIVE TO
YOU FROM A RESOURCE STAFFING
AND EXPERIENCE PERSPECTIVE WE
WILL BE ABLE TO ENSURE
PERPETUATES IN DEFINITELY SO I
WANT TO BE CLEAR WHAT I'M
HEARING IS YOUR CONCERN IS NOT
ABOUT A TWO TIER WHO IS
STANDING UP IN A VERY PUBLIC
WAY AND DECLARING THEIR VALUES
AND THEIR MISSION.
YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT FUTURE SAY
INDEPENDENT INDIVIDUALS.
>> SORRY, THAT'S THE WHO BUILD
SUCH A STRUCTURE.
>> SEVENTEEN HUNDRED SQUARE
FEET AND SEE THAT THERE'S A
DEED RESTRICTION ABOUT
AFFORDABILITY WHEN THERE'S NOT
OR MORE LIKELY WHAT HAPPENS
AFTER A TRANSACTION OF THOSE
SAVE THAT FOR SOME REASON IN
THIS CASE THE COMMUNITY LAND
TRUSTS MODEL DOES NOT CURSER
HERE.
WHAT HAPPENS TO THAT UNIT?
IS IT JUST RENDERED THE
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE AT THAT
POINT SO AGAIN, THIS IS THIS IS
A GREAT MODEL I THINK FOR
MISSING MIDDLE IF IF IT'S
SOMETHING THAT THE PLANNING
COMMISSION IS INTERESTED IN.
I WOULD ALSO ADD THAT YOU HEARD
FROM THE PETITIONER A LOT OF A
LOT OF CHALLENGES IN THIS
APPROACH.
THERE'S A LOT OF LANGUAGE AND
MEASUREMENT AND HOW WE'RE HOW
WE'RE CONSIDERING THAT IF IT IS
SOMETHING THAT YOU ARE
INTERESTED IN PURSUING AN
ALTERNATIVE OPTION IS A LITTLE
BIT DIFFERENT THAN WHAT WAS
BROUGHT UP FROM A REZONING.
FOR EXAMPLE, YOU COULD JUST SAY
DUPLEXES ARE PERMITTED IN OUR
ONE ZONES THEN THAT WOULD
PROVIDE FLEXIBILITY FOR NOT
ONLY THE LAND TRUSTS BUT OTHER
PROVIDERS TO HAVE MORE
FLEXIBILITY TO BUILD HOUSING
BUT AT THE END AT THE CORE WE
ZONED BASED ON LAND USES AND I
THINK I CAN'T SIT HERE AND
RECOMMEND THAT WE ENACT SOME
LAND USE THAT WE ARE SAYING IS
APPROPRIATE BECAUSE IT IS OWNED
BY ONE ENTITY AND FOR SOME
REASON THAT LAND USE WOULD NOT
BE APPROPRIATE IF IT WAS OWNED
BY ANOTHER ENTITY.
>> I SEE THE MARKET ABOUT IT
BUT I JUST WANT TO RESPOND TO
THAT QUICKLY.
I DON'T THINK THAT IS WHAT I'M
SAYING I THINK OR WHAT IS BEING
PROPOSED IT'S NOT ABOUT THE
ENTITY, IT'S ABOUT THE
AFFORDABILITY.
SO I THINK WHAT WE'RE SAYING IS
THAT A PARTICULAR DENSER FORM
OF LAND USE MAY BE APPROPRIATE
IF THERE ARE CERTAIN
AFFORDABILITY REQUIREMENTS OR
RESTRICTIONS.
AND I ALSO THINK THAT IT'S
PRETTY CLEAR THAT THIS BODY
WOULD LOVE ALL R-1 LOTS TO
ALLOW DUPLEXES AND THAT'S KIND
OF WHERE THE COMPLAINT IS
HEADING THAT'S CONCERNED ABOUT
THE FUTURE VILLES.
THAT'S NOT A CONCERN I HAVE IF
THAT'S WHERE WE'RE HEADING IF
IF IN TWO YEARS FROM NOW WE'VE
UPDATED THE UDC ACCORDING TO
THE UPDATED PLAN AND THESE LOTS
ALL ARE IN THIS NEW RESIDENTIAL
CATEGORY WHICH ALLOWS THIS
DENSITY ALREADY THAT DOESN'T
SEEM LIKE SOMETHING TO BE
CONCERNED ABOUT.
IT DOESN'T SO YEAH.
OK, I'LL STOP.
>> GOOD.
SORRY.
THANK YOU COMMISSIONER.
MS.
I'M GOING TO VOTE TO SUPPORT
THIS.
I THINK THESE ARE
EXTRAORDINARILY IMPORTANT
PROJECTS.
UM I THE THE I HEAR THE TRUST
SAYING THAT THE EXISTING
PROCEDURAL OPTIONS ARE NOT
VIABLE.
I BELIEVE THEM.
I ALSO
REMEMBER THAT WE HAVE A
LEGISLATIVE DIRECTIVE TO BE
CREATIVE AND AGGRESSIVE WITH
THE TOOLS THAT WE HAVE TO
APPROVE PROJECTS AND PROPOSALS
LIKE THIS.
THE PROPOSAL ON THE TABLE
DELIVERS A LOT OF VALUE FOR THE
COMMUNITY AND I THINK THE
BENEFITS ARE WORTH THE RISKS.
I THINK I RESPECT AND
UNDERSTAND MR. GARBER SUGGESTS
ABOUT ADDING ADDITIONAL
SUSTAINABILITY REQUIREMENTS
INTO THE MIX.
I'M NOT INCLINED TO SUPPORT
THAT.
I THINK THE LAND TRUST PRIORITY
IS DELIVERING AFFORDABLE UNITS
AND THEY HAVE A MODEL THAT I
ASSUME THEY'VE COSTED OUT THAT
WILL PERMIT THEM TO EXECUTE
EVERY ASK THAT WE LAYER IN ADDS
COMPLEXITY, COMPLEXITY AND COST
TO THAT WORK.
I THINK THAT'S AN APPROPRIATE
CONVERSATION WHEN WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT A MASSIVE MARKET RATE
PADDYS I DON'T THINK THAT'S AN
APPROPRIATE CONVERSATION TO
HAVE IN CONNECTION WITH A LAND
TRUST THAT'S PROPOSING TO
DELIVER UNITS LIKE THIS AT THIS
AFFORDABILITY.
THE MOST SERIOUS ISSUE TO ME IS
THE ONE RAISED BY STAFF
RELATING TO LONG TERM
ENFORCEMENT.
I UNDERSTAND THE LAND TRUST
RESPONSE IS THAT IT WILL IT HAS
A DEED RESTRICTION AND A WRITER
FIRST REFUSAL ON FUTURE
TRANSFERS AND THAT'S THE
PRIMARY MECHANISM BY WHICH IT
WILL ENFORCE I UNDERSTAND AND
RESPECT STAFF'S POSITION THAT
THAT ENFORCEMENT MECHANISM
CARRIES WITH IT LONG TERM RISK
ESPECIALLY IF THE LAND TRUST
FAILS.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME AGAIN
GOING BACK TO THE LEGISLATIVE
DIRECTION TO BE AGGRESSIVE
CREATIVE WITH PURSUING CHANGES
LIKE THIS THAT WILL ADD
AFFORDABLE UNITS, MISSING UNITS
THAT WE DON'T HAVE THAT A LOT
OF THAT ARE NOT THAT WE'RE NOT
SEEING BEING BUILT CERTAINLY
NOT THIS QUICKLY OR AT THE
SCALE.
I THINK WE NEED TO TAKE THE
LAND TRUST UP ON THE PROPOSAL
THAT IT IS OFFERING ON ON ITS
FACE.
THANK YOU, COMMISSIONER ADAMS.
COMMISSIONER NORTON.
OK, SO I THINK WHAT THE OTHER
INTEREST IS DOING JUST AWESOME
.
I WANT TO SUPPORT IT.
I REALLY HAVE TROUBLE WITH THIS
AMENDMENT.
UM, I REALLY RECOGNIZE YOUR
PASSION, MR CHAMBERS AND I
REALLY ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THIS IS
NOT A MODEST CHANGE.
THIS IS A DRAMATIC CHANGE TO
THE TEXT OF A CODE THAT WILL
APPLY EVERYWHERE AND THERE'S
NOTHING IN HERE THAT SAYS THAT
IT'S GOING TO BE THE COMMUNITY
LAND TRUST IS THE ENTITY THAT'S
DOING THIS.
IT WILL OPEN THE DOOR FOR
ANYBODY TO DO THIS AND I'M
HAPPY TO CHANGE IT.
>> NO ENFORCEMENT MECHANISM AND
SO WE'VE GOTTEN A LOT
OF SUGGESTIONS ABOUT WAYS THAT
WE COULD TWEAK THIS TO MAKE IT
WORK.
BUT THAT'S NOT WHAT'S ON THE
TEXT HERE THAT'S IN FRONT OF US
AND WHAT WILL BE ON IF WE
PROPOSE SENDING THIS FORWARD?
IT WILL READ JUST LIKE IT READS
NOW AND IT'S PRETTY WIDE OPEN
AND I'M CONCERNED ABOUT THE
ENFORCEABILITY.
IT'S TRUE WE'RE HEADED IN THIS
DIRECTION PROBABLY.
BUT THIS IS EFFECTIVELY DUPLEX
ZONING BY A DIFFERENT NAME.
I MEAN IT'S DUPLEX AND WE'RE
JUST BENDING THE CURRENT
CODE TO GET THERE AND I KNOW WE
HAD A DISCUSSION DURING THE OR
THIS ISN'T FORMALISM THIS IS
STRAIGHT UP STATUTORY
CONSTRUCTION AND IF YOU START
DOING THINGS BY DEFINITION WHAT
IT DOESN'T SAY THAT YOU'RE
DOING I MEAN IF YOU TALK THE
THE DEFINITION AND DO SOMETHING
THAT'S NOT THAT'S PROBLEMATIC.
YOU KNOW, THE ZONING
CODE DOESN'T REALLY MEAN WHAT
IT SAYS.
SO HAVING BUILDING BIGGER
SECOND STRUCTURES AND CALLING
IT AN ACCESSORY DWELLING AND IT
JUST DOESN'T MAKE SENSE TO ME
THAT'S NOT TO STRUCTURE ZONING
SCHEME.
SO I REALLY WANT TO WORK I
WOULD REALLY MUCH PREFER TO
WORK WITH YOU TO TRY AND COME
UP WITH THE MECHANISM TO DO
WHAT YOU'RE TRYING TO DO THAT
DOESN'T DO THIS DOESN'T DO IT
THIS WAY.
IT DOESN'T DO IT BY MAJOR TEXT
CHANGE THAT WILL APPLY
EVERYWHERE THAT ANYBODY COULD
PICK UP NEWS THAT'S REALLY TO
UNIT ZONING.
THAT'S NOT AN YOU THAT COULD BE
QUITE A BIT BIGGER THAN EVEN
THE PRIMARY UNIT.
I THINK IF BASED ON THE WAY
THIS IS WRITTEN, HAVE YOU
THOUGHT ABOUT MAYBE CREATING A
HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION THAT
COULD BECOME AN ENFORCEMENT
MECHANISM?
I THINK THERE MAY BE SOME
CREATIVE WAYS TO BETTER
IMPROVE.
I DON'T THINK HOMEOWNERS
ASSOCIATIONS HAVE TO BE
CONTIGUOUS PROPERTIES.
WHERE IS THAT A QUESTION TO?
YEAH, I MEAN I THINK THERE I
THINK THERE ARE MORE CREATIVE
WAYS TO GET WHERE YOU'RE TRYING
TO GO.
I GUESS THE QUESTION I DO HAVE
YOU AS YOU SAY IN YOUR TEXT YOU
HAVE 50 PROPERTIES OF LAND
READY TO GO.
>> BUT AS YOU SAID YOU ONLY
HAVE SEVEN OR NINE RIGHT NOW WE
HAVE NINE PROPERTIES THAT WILL
ENABLE THE CONSTRUCTION
OF TWENTY FOUR UNITS AND HOW
MANY OF THOSE WOULD REQUIRE
REZONING TO GET WHERE YOU WANT
TO GO?
NONE OF THOSE WOULD WORK IF WE
GO WITH THE 800 SQUARE FOOT SIX
HUNDRED OR EIGHT HUNDRED SQUARE
FOOT USE IF WE WANT LARGER
HOMES THAN WE WOULD HAVE TO
REZONE SO SO I GUESS I'M NOT
CLEAR ON THE URGENCY OF THIS
EITHER.
SO I WE'RE GETTING THESE PUBLIC
COMMENTS THAT I CAN'T BUY MY
HOME UNTIL YOU DO THIS BUT IT'S
NOT CLEAR TO ME THAT'S REALLY
TRUE.
YEAH, WELL SO I HAVE A LOT
OF BUYERS WHO WOULD LIKE HOMES
I ATTACHED ALSO FOR YOUR
CONSIDERATION COMMENTS FROM
FOUR HUNDRED OF THE BUYERS THAT
WE HAVE ON A LIST SO YOU HAVE A
PDF THAT'S FORTY NINE PAGES
LONG WITH TESTIMONIALS FROM
FOUR HUNDRED BUYERS WHO ARE ON
A WAIT LIST AND WE HAVE MANY
MORE THAN THAT.
>> SO THE FOLKS WHO ARE HERE
WE'RE LOOKING AN IMMEDIATE
APPLICATION TO THE NINE PARCELS
THAT WE OWN BUT THEN WE'RE ALSO
LOOKING FOR KILLING TWO BIRDS
WITH ONE STONE WITH THE ABILITY
TO THEN MOVE AHEAD AS QUICKLY
AS POSSIBLE WITH OTHER PARCELS
.
AND SO ONE OF OUR CONSTRAINTS
IS FINANCING.
YOU KNOW, WE'RE A STARTUP
DEVELOPER.
WE'RE FUNDED RIGHT NOW BY OUR
BOARD MEMBERS AND COMMUNITY
SUPPORTERS.
BUT WE NEED TO BUILD A
DEVELOPMENT TRACK RECORD.
WE CANNOT OBTAIN FINANCIAL
COMMERCIAL FINANCING RIGHT NOW.
SO A REALLY IMPORTANT MECHANISM
IS TO BE ABLE TO TAKE THESE
HUNDREDS AND HUNDREDS OF BUYERS
THAT WE HAVE ON A WAIT LIST WHO
ACTUALLY HAVE DOWN PAYMENTS AND
TO BE ABLE TO PAIR TWO OF THEM
OR MORE TOGETHER TO USE THEIR
DOWN PAYMENTS TO BUY A LOT AND
THEN BUILD A HOME FOR THEM.
BUT IF WE HAVE TO REZONE THAT
FEELS VERY RISKY TO THEM TO PUT
THEIR ONLY DOWN PAYMENT THAT
THEY HAVE SAVED TO PURCHASE A
LOT THAT THEY DON'T KNOW FOR
SURE IF IT WILL BE OWNED.
SO THAT'S YOU KNOW, WE'RE
TRYING TO DO TWO THINGS FOR THE
EXISTING NINE PARCELS WHERE WE
PLAN TO BUILD TWENTY FOUR HOMES
.
WE COULD WE CAN AND WILL COME
BACK AND REQUEST REZONING IF
THAT IS WHAT WE HAVE TO DO.
BUT WE WOULD PREFER TO PURSUE
THIS SOLUTION OR A REVISION
OF THIS PROPOSAL THAT WOULD
SOLVE OUR CURRENT PROBLEM AND
CREATE A PATHWAY FOR THE NEXT
COUPLE OF YEARS UNTIL THE NEW
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ZONING IS IN
PLACE.
IT'S NOT THE CASE THE IT'S NOT
THE CASE THAT WE CAN MAKE THIS
CHANGE NOW AND THEN IN A COUPLE
OF YEARS IF WE DON'T LIKE IT WE
CAN JUST DROP WE'VE
CREATED EXPECTATIONS AND WE
MIGHT HAVE
CREATED NONCONFORMING USES.
IT WILL BE AROUND FOREVER.
THERE COULD BE CONSEQUENCES TO
CHANGING THE CODE .
SO I REALLY I TOTALLY GET WHAT
YOU'RE TRYING TO DO.
I'M REALLY SYMPATHETIC TO ALL
OF THE FOLKS WHO CAME IN AND
DESPERATELY WANT HOME.
I REALLY WANT TO HELP YOU.
I JUST HAVE REALLY SERIOUS
RESERVATIONS ABOUT THIS
APPROACH.
I THINK YOU KNOW TO MR
STOLLBERG GOT ON A PISTOL THAT
HE KEEPS TELLING US HE GOT TO
THINK AHEAD OF THE LONG TERM
CONSEQUENCES OF SEMENKO CHANGES
YOU MAKE THIS IS IT I MEAN THIS
IS REALLY LOOSE LANGUAGE THAT
OPENS THE DOOR TO A WHOLE LOT
OF THINGS THAT I WOULD BE VERY
NERVOUS ABOUT WITHOUT REALLY
THINKING THEM THROUGH AND IT
MAY NOT BE YOU WHO'S STANDING
IN FRONT OF US WHO NOW WANTS TO
TAKE OUR PLANS AND TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF IT.
AND I TRUST YOU GUYS.
I MEAN YOU'VE DEMONSTRATED YOUR
COMMITMENT TO THIS WE CAN'T
REGULATE BY OWNERSHIP SO WE
CAN'T RIGHT THIS AND YOU CAN
ONLY DO IT IF YOU'RE THE LAND
TRUST.
BUT THAT MEANS WE HAVE TO WRITE
IT IN A WAY THAT ANYBODY COULD
TAKE ADVANTAGE OF IT AND THEN
YOU COULD PROPERTY OWNERS WHO
ARE GAMING THE SYSTEM TO GET
THERE.
I HAVE I'M SORRY I HAVE
RESERVATIONS ABOUT THIS.
>> SO LET ME ANSWER YOUR ONE
QUESTION THEN.
>> I'M SORRY, SIR.
WHICH WHICH QUESTION WAS THAT?
SO YOU ASK ABOUT THE WAYS OK?
YES.
SO I MEAN ANOTHER ASPECT OF THE
CODE IS THAT WE'RE GOING TO BE
REQUIRED CURRENTLY TO CREATE
MASTER DEEDS AND A WAY FOR EACH
OF THESE LOCATIONS AND THEY DO
HAVE TO BE CONTIGUOUS AND IT IS
ADDING A TREMENDOUS AMOUNT
OF COST TO THE BUYERS.
HOWEVER, IT DOES CREATE ANOTHER
ENFORCEMENT MECHANISM BECAUSE
WE CAN PUT SOME OF THOSE
RESTRICTIONS IN THE MASTER DEED
AND BYLAWS SO THAT CREATES
ANOTHER OPPORTUNITY TO ENFORCE
THE AFFORDABILITY THAT'S IN
THIS CODE .
>> THAT'S NO IT'S NOT BUT IT IS
IN OUR MASTER DEED THAT WE'RE
RECORDING WITH THE CITY SHORTLY
WE'LL ABOUT THE LAW IS WHAT YOU
HAVE TO SPEAK INTO THE MIKE I'M
SORRY.
YEAH.
I MEAN AGAIN I SEE WHERE YOU'RE
TRYING TO GO AND I APPRECIATE
WHAT YOU'RE TRYING TO DO BUT
WHAT THE THINGS YOU'RE TALKING
ABOUT AND THE OTHER SUGGESTIONS
WE HAD ISN'T WHAT WOULD
ACTUALLY BE IN THE CODE SO THAT
ALL
WE'VE OPENED UP A DOOR THAT
COULD BE REALLY PROBLEMATIC
THAT WE HAVEN'T THOUGHT
THROUGH.
OK.
ALL I HAVE LEATHERBY LI DISH
AND THEN MILLS' SO LET ME SEE
IF I HAVE WHAT I HAVE.
OK.
ALL RIGHT.
SO WE DID YOU WANT TO GO OH OK.
>> YOU'LL DEFER TO COUNCIL NO
BRITISH COUNCIL MEMBER DISH
THEN COMMISSIONER LEE DIDN'T
COMMISSIONER MILLS THEN ABMS OK
I JUST WANT TO TALK TO STAFF
RIGHT NOW SO SO BECAUSE I'M NOT
A TRAINED PLANNER OR PLANNING
LAWYER SO I WANT TO UNDERSTAND
THAT WHAT WE CAN DO AT THIS
TABLE IS WORK WITH CODE .
WE'RE WORKING WITH THE UDC SO
WE CAN TALK ALL WE WANT ABOUT
MASTER ET CETERA ET CETERA BUT
THAT ISN'T SOMETHING THAT WE
HAVE CONTROL OR ENFORCEABILITY
OVER.
IS THAT CORRECT, MR. LEINERT?
THAT'S CORRECT.
WE WOULD HAVE YEAH.
WE WOULDN'T HAVE ANY INFLUENCE
OR REGULATION OVER A MASTER
DEED FOR A CONDOMINIUM.
WE POTENTIALLY WOULD HAVE SOME
AGENCY IF THERE WAS SOME
COVENANT OR RESTRICTION THAT
WAS PROVIDED TO THE CITY AS A
BENEFICIARY.
MY POINT IS EVEN WITH THAT
THERE ARE LIMITED WAYS THAT WE
HAVE THE ABILITY TO ENSURE THAT
SOMETHING HAPPENS AS A RESULT
OF THAT.
BUT AS IT RELATES TO QUESTIONS
ABOUT CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATIONS
AND THE LIKE, THOSE ARE THOSE
ARE LARGELY GOVERNED BY
ASSESSING LAWS AND BUILDING
CODES WHERE THERE ARE SOME
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS ABOUT
OWNERSHIP STRUCTURE AND HOW
BUILDINGS CAN OR CAN'T BE
CONSTRUCTED.
AND I DON'T SIT HERE AND AND
PRETEND THAT ALL OF THAT
KNOWLEDGE BUT GENERALLY
SPEAKING WE DON'T ENFORCE
PRIVATE DEED RESTRICTIONS OR
PRIVATE CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION
DOCUMENTS.
>> MASTERFOODS OK, SO WHAT I'M
TRYING TO THINK ABOUT IS THE
WORST CASE SCENARIO.
SO FROM THE INCREDIBLY
INFORMATIVE EXCHANGE BETWEEN
STAFF AND COMMISSIONER APRON'S
IT SOUNDS TO ME THAT WE HAVE TO
ALLOW 17 HUNDRED SQUARE FEET
BECAUSE WE CAN'T CHANGE THE
DEFINITION OF HOW A FLOOR AREA
IS MEASURED FOR THE ENTIRE
CODE .
>> SO EITHER WE ALLOW THAT OR
WE ALLOW SOMETHING LESS.
WE SAY OK, WE'LL GIVE YOU MORE
WILL WILL CHANGE THE DATA YOU
THINK AND WE'LL MAKE IT MORE
GENEROUS THAN IT IS BECAUSE
IT'S NOT VERY GENEROUS RIGHT
NOW BUT WE DON'T REALLY HAVE AN
OPTION HERE.
SEVENTEEN HUNDRED SQUARE FEET
IS WHAT'S BEING ASKED FOR.
I'VE BEEN LOOKING UP THE OTHER
CITIES THAT HAVE BEEN MENTIONED
SEATTLE LIMITS EIGHTY YEARS TO
1000 SQUARE FEET.
PORTLAND 800 SQUARE FEET.
CALIFORNIA STATE LAW TWELVE
HUNDRED SQUARE FEET.
SO WE'RE BEING ASKED TO ALLOW
AN 82 TO BE A SIZE THAT NONE
OF THE CITIES PRESENTED AS
MODELS ALLOW BUT BIGGER THAN
WHAT WE ALLOW.
SO MAYBE THAT IS SOMETHING WE
COULD BE CONSIDERING.
IT SOUNDS LIKE SUNSETTING IS
ALSO NOT A REALISTIC OPTION
BECAUSE OF THE PROBLEM
OF NONCONFORMING USES LIKE YOU.
AND PLUS HOW DO YOU TAKE
SOMETHING AWAY THAT IS A
PROPERTY?
NO, NO.
YOU KNOW WHAT?
I'M SORRY.
I'M STUPE.
I MEANT TO ASK COULD MR.
LEONARD WOULD YOU PLEASE ASSESS
THE WEATHER SUNSETTING PASSING
SOMETHING FOR NOW BECAUSE WE
KNOW THE PLANE IS GOING TO TAKE
A LITTLE WHILE AND THEN
SUNSETTING IT.
>> IS THAT A REALISTIC OPTION?
THE CITY ALWAYS HAS AGENCY TO
MAKE ZONING DECISIONS ON
PROPERTY AND THEY CAN CHANGE
REGULATIONS WHEN YOU ARE
PICKING AWAY SOMETHING THAT IS
CAN BE PERCEIVED BY PROPERTY
OWNERS DIFFERENTLY EVEN IF YOU
ARE GRANTING SOMETHING.
AND SO GENERALLY SPEAKING IT'S
NOT UNHEARD OF BUT IT'S RARE
THAT YOU WOULD FIND COMMUNITIES
THAT HAVE A SINGLE FAMILY
ZONING DISTRICT AND THEN GO IN
AND SAY YOU CAN'T BUILD
ANYTHING THERE.
IT'S ABOUT AS SIMPLY AS I CAN
ANSWER IT.
YEAH, I FEELING THAT YOU HAVE
THE ABILITY TO CHANGE
REGULATIONS.
IT IS NOT WITHOUT CONSEQUENCE
BUT WHEN IT IS DONE WITH
PURPOSE AND PLANNING AND IT'S
ARTICULATED THAT'S YOUR BEST
RATIONALE TO MAKE THAT DECISION
.
>> OK, SO ESSENTIALLY WE IF IF
WE APPROVE THIS WHAT WHAT WE
WOULD BE DOING IS ALLOWING
ANYONE TO BUILD AN EDU WE ARE
ASKED TO APPROVE SEVENTEEN
HUNDRED SQUARE FEET BUT WE DO
NOT HAVE TO GIVE WHAT WE ARE
BEING ASKED WE ARE BEING ASKED
TO INCREASE THE SIZE OF AN EDU
THAT COULD BE BUILT ANYWHERE
AND THE THE WORST THING THAT I
CAN IMAGINE AND I WOULD BE
HAPPY TO HEAR OTHER PEOPLE'S
WORST CASE SCENARIOS BUT THE
WORST THING THAT I CAN IMAGINE
IS THAT THERE WOULD BE PRESSURE
FOR PEOPLE THERE WOULD BE
DEVELOPERS BUYING UP MODEST
HOMES AND RATHER THAN
BIGFOOTING THOSE PARCELS THEY
WOULD BE PUTTING THE BIGGEST
AIDO THAT WE ALLOWED THE BIG
OK, I'M SORRY MR. CHAMBERS, BUT
I JUST DON'T KNOW WHAT TO DO
WITH THE DEED RESTRICTION THING
BECAUSE IT DOESN'T REALLY SOUND
I MEAN IT SOUNDS LIKE SOMETHING
THAT CAN BE IN THERE BUT IT'S
NOT SOMETHING THAT IS EASY FOR
US TO ACT ON.
I MEAN WE CAN BARELY ENFORCE
THE REGULATIONS THAT WE HAVE
AGAINST SHORT TERM RENTALS IN
OUR ONE NEIGHBORHOOD.
IT IS EXTREMELY DIFFICULT TO DO
THAT AND YOU WOULDN'T THINK
THAT IS BUT IT REALLY IS.
SO I DON'T I DON'T KNOW, MR.
LEONARD, WHAT SHOULD BE WHAT
SHOULD BE MY RESPONSE TO THE
IDEA THAT IT WOULD HAVE TO BE
RESTRICTED WHAT WOULD BE SO
THIS PROPOSAL WOULD REQUIRE IT
TO BE RESTRICTED BUT IT DOES
NOT REQUIRE THAT THE
DESTRUCTION TO BE BY AN ENTITY
THAT IS MISSION BASED SUCH AS
THE COMMUNITY LAND TRUST SUCH
AS HABITAT FOR HUMANITY, SUCH
AS AVALON HOUSING SUCH AS THE
HOUSING COMMISSION, IT COULD BE
BRAD ARTS HOUSING PROFITEER LLC
WOULD JUST BE AS CAPABLE
OF BUILDING A 700 SQUARE FOOT
AIDOO AND PUTTING A RESTRICTION
ON IT THE DEED RESTRICTION
ITSELF AGAIN I THINK THE WORST
CASE SCENARIO I JUST WANT TO BE
CLEAR IS THAT A LARGE LARGER
AREA WAS BUILT AND IT IS NOT
AFFORDABLE NOR IS THE PRIMARY
THAT IS THE WORST CASE SCENARIO
AND I THINK THAT THAT SCENARIO
IS LESS LIKELY WITH A MISSION
BASED OR AN AGENCY SUCH AS THE
COMMUNITY LAND TRUST.
BUT IT IS NOT ABSOLUTE ENTITIES
THRIVE AND THEY ARE CHALLENGED
AND THEY HAVE IN THE PAST AND
AGAIN I WANT TO REITERATE WHEN
WE ARE THINKING ABOUT AN
COMMISSIONER EVANS I THINK WAS
HAD A DIFFERENT PERSPECTIVE ON
THAT.
THAT'S GREAT.
WE ARE VERY CAREFUL, FOR
EXAMPLE, TO DISTINGUISH THAT
OWNERSHIP HOUSING AND RENTAL
HOUSING ARE ON EQUAL FOOTING.
WE DO NOT LOOK AT THINGS
DIFFERENTLY IF THIS BODY WANTS
TO IDENTIFY THAT A DIFFERENT
USE IS IDENTIFIED AND DEFINED
BECAUSE OF THIS DEED
ABSTRACTION AS IMPERFECT AS IT
IS OF COURSE THAT'S YOUR
RECOMMENDATION TO MAKE.
BUT FROM MY PERSPECTIVE USE IS
TRADITIONALLY USES VERY
INDEPENDENT OF OWNERSHIP
OPERATION.
IT IS SOMETHING MORE MEASURED
AT THE TIME THAT WE ARE SAYING
YES THIS BUILDING NEEDS WHAT IS
EXPECTED THERE.
WE CAN BY THAT GO ON WITH YOUR
PROPERTY RIGHTS AS ANYBODY ELSE
WOULD SO I DON'T KNOW IF I
GUESS THIS IS MY QUESTION.
I GUESS THIS IS FOR ME MY
QUESTION ABOUT MY WORST CASE
SCENARIO.
WE'VE GOT TO APPROVE SOMETHING
THAT WE CAN LIVE WITH THAT'S
GOING TO APPLY TO EVERY AH ONE
PARCEL AND IF IT CREATES
ADDITIONAL HOUSING, WHETHER
AFFORDABLE OR NOT, DO I CARE IF
IT CREATES ADDITIONAL HOUSING,
WHETHER IT IS AFFORDABLE OR NOT
OR NOT?
>> MORE QUICKLY THAN THE CAR
PLAN IS GOING TO ALLOW THIS DO
WHAT'S WRONG WITH ME THAT I
DON'T CARE?
I MEAN I'M NOT SURE THAT I
THINK SEVENTEEN HUNDRED SQUARE
FEET IS THE APPROPRIATE SIZE
FOR MANY REASONS BUT
I JUST AND
I'M ACTUALLY I'M KIND
OF ACTUALLY ASKING YOU TO HELP
ME SEE WHAT I'M MISSING.
WHO ARE YOU ADDRESSING THAT TO
TO MR. LEONARD.
AND THEN A CONVERSATION WITH
HIM?
WELL, YES, THAT I THINK THAT IS
YOUR QUESTION AND I I I
UNDERSTAND YOUR QUESTION.
THIS IS TIMING AND ALL OF THE
PERSPECTIVES ON THIS.
I DON'T PROFESS TO SAY THAT ONE
IS RIGHT STAFF IS PRESENTING TO
YOU YOU REALLY IN TERMS
OF HAVING SOME OF THESE
CONVERSATIONS BROADLY ABOUT THE
COMMUNITY.
I ANTICIPATE THAT YOU HAVE THAT
PLAN YOU ARE GOING TO ADOPT IS
GOING TO RENDER THIS AMENDMENT
LIKELY UNNECESSARY, PROVIDE
MORE FLEXIBILITY NOT ONLY FOR
COMMUNITY LAND TRUST HABITAT
AVALON BUT ALL DEVELOPERS AND I
WANT TO BE CLEAR THAT EVEN
ADOPTING THIS LANGUAGE AS IT IS
I I HONESTLY SEE THAT THERE
WILL BE LITTLE DISTINCTION
BETWEEN FOR PROFIT AND MISSION
BASED ENTITLEMENT AS IT IS.
AND SO GIVEN ALL OF THAT,
THAT'S WHERE STAFF'S
RECOMMENDATION IS THAT YOU, YOU
AND THE CITY ARE IN THE CONTEXT
OF HAVING THIS CONVERSATION
RIGHT NOW.
I UNDERSTAND THAT THAT IS AN
IMMEDIATE TIMING FOR THIS
ORGANIZATION AND
OUR MISSION.
WE HAVE SUGGESTED YOU KNOW, WE
TALKED ABOUT REZONING.
THEY HAVE, YOU KNOW, A CREDIT
THAT THEY ARE TRYING TO FIND
METHODS TO GET THROUGH IT.
BUT WE ARE WE'VE TRIED TO
PROVIDE RECOMMENDATIONS TO THEM
IN THE CONTEXT OF OUR CURRENT
LEGISLATIVE, ADMINISTRATIVE AND
BUREAUCRATIC STRUCTURE WHICH
FOR BETTER OR FOR WORSE IS THE
STRUCTURE IN WHICH I HAVE TO
PROVIDE ADVICE AND DIRECTION TO
CUSTOMERS ABOUT WHAT THEY CAN
AND THEY CAN'T DO.
AND SO TO GO MORE QUICKLY, I
HONESTLY THINK A MORE SIMPLE
AMENDMENT WOULD BE TO SIMPLY
THINK ABOUT DUPLEXES AND ONE'S
ZONES.
I THINK THAT THE
CONSTRUCTIVENESS A ORDINANCE
EXPANSION IS I I HONESTLY DON'T
KNOW WHAT CHALLENGES IT MIGHT
PRESENT FOR AFTER THESE NINE
LOCKS FOR THE NEXT ONES BUT
THAT'S WHY OUR RECOMMENDATION
IS WHAT IT IS THAT YOU IN THE
CONTEXT OF THIS POLICY
DISCUSSION YOU ARE SYMPATHETIC
TO IT.
YOU LET THAT CONVERSATION BEAR
OUT SO WE CAN APPLY THE
RECOMMENDATIONS BROADLY.
THANK YOU, MR. YEAH OK I GET
THAT BUT I'M STILL STUCK
BECAUSE I IF WE JUST BOOKS WELL
IF I MEAN WHEN WHEN DUPLEXES
AND TRY PLEXUS ARE ARE
PERMITTED ACROSS OUR ONE HOUR
TO IN ACROSS THE CITY THEN
PEOPLE WILL BUILD THEM INSTEAD
OF BUILDING EIGHTY YEARS.
SO IF TONIGHT WE SAID OK 800
SQUARE FOOT EIGHTY USE AS LONG
AS IT'S SMALLER THAN THE
PRIMARY EVERYWHERE THERE'D BE
AN IMPROVEMENT OVER OUR CURRENT
EU LEGISLATION IT WOULD BE AN
IMPROVEMENT.
>> SOME OF IT IS SIX I WILL I'M
SORRY MR. ELEANOR COULD I PAUSE
YOU BECAUSE I HAVE FOUR
COMMISSIONERS STOP NOW OK THANK
YOU COMMISSIONER DISH LET'S GO
TO COMMISSIONER LEE THEN I HAVE
NILS ADAMS AND WHETHER IT
GREAT.
HI THANK YOU FOR COMING.
I'M VERY SUPPORTIVE OF THE
EFFORTS.
WOULD LOVE TO SEE AFFORDABLE
UNITS APPEAR NURSES, TEACHERS
THESE ARE ALL PROFESSIONS THAT
WE CAN CERTAINLY SUPPORT.
I WANTED MOSTLY TALK ABOUT
TIMING.
THIS IS A RECOMMENDATION FOR
UDC CHANGE JUST SO THAT'S WHY
THIS DOESN'T END HERE.
RIGHT?
FORGET TO GO TO CITY COUNCIL.
THERE'S GOT TO BE TWO READINGS
ADOPTION.
SO PLEASE GIVE US AN OVERVIEW
OF THE REALISTIC TIMELINE
ASSOCIATED WITH YOUR
DEVELOPMENT OF THIS.
WE ARE READY TO BREAK GROUND
PROBABLY IN ABOUT A MONTH ON
ONE OF THE SITES AND THEN THE
OTHER THREE LOCATIONS.
WE'RE HOPING TO BREAK GROUND
MID TO LATE FALL.
>> OK, GOT IT.
I'M GOING TO JUST IN THE
PRESENTATION YOU GUYS MENTIONED
TIFF'S.
HOW ARE THOSE DISCUSSIONS GOING
BECAUSE IT REQUIRES CITY
COUNCIL AS WELL AS WASHINGTON
COUNTY BROWNFIELD REDEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY KIND OF APPROVALS.
CAN YOU HELP ME TO BETTER
UNDERSTAND JUST GIVEN THAT THAT
PROCESS ITSELF COULD ALSO TAKE
FOUR TO SIX MONTHS?
SO AGAIN, I WANT TO TRY TO SEE
HOW WE CAN TRY TO EFFECTUATE
SOMETHING HERE THAT IS USEFUL
FOR YOUR TIMING.
JUST TRY TO GET A BETTER
UNDERSTANDING OF WHERE WE'RE AT
RIGHT NOW.
SO ALL THOSE DISCUSSIONS GOING
ON WE BEGAN WORKING WITH THE
COUNTY VRA IN FEBRUARY
OF TWENTY TWENTY FOUR.
IT'S BEEN A VERY LONG PROCESS.
WE SUBMITTED A REVISED TIF
PIARA APPLICATION IN DECEMBER
OF TWENTY TWENTY FOUR AND THEN
WE ENGAGED WITH THE BOROUGH
SUBCOMMITTEE IN MULTIPLE
REVISIONS FOR ABOUT FIVE MONTHS
AND THEN SUMMER CAME AND THERE
WERE MANY DELAYS BECAUSE
OF SUMMER WE'RE WE WERE ALSO
INFORMED BY THE CITY THAT THE
BOROUGH APPLICATION PROPERTIES
SHOULD NOT HAVE ANY REZONING
CONTINGENCIES SO WE REVISED OUR
PLANS TO BE ABLE TO PROCEED
WITHOUT ANY REZONING SO THAT WE
COULD GET THE HOUSING TIF
APPROVAL.
SO WE HAVE A PATHWAY TO DO
THAT.
SO WE'RE HOPING THAT THAT PLAN
WILL BE I BELIEVE IT'S APPROVED
BY THE COUNTY.
THEY'RE JUST WAITING FOR THE I
MEAN THE INITIAL BAHRA APPROVAL
I BELIEVE IS THEY'RE JUST
WAITING FOR FINAL CONFIRMATION
WHICH MAY HAVE ALREADY BEEN
GIVEN THAT THERE'S NO REZONING
REQUIRED AND THEN I BELIEVE IT
CAN BE SCHEDULED WITH CITY
COUNCIL AND THEN IT WILL GO
BACK TO THE COUNTY BOARD
OF COMMISSIONERS.
WOULD YOU BREAK GROUND PRIOR TO
ATIT?
I BELIEVE THAT WE CAN ON ONE
OF THE SITES THAT FIRST SITE IS
NOT CONDITIONAL ON THE FUNDING
FROM THE TIFE.
YEAH, BUT THE REMAINING SITES
WOULD NEED THE FUNDING ALTHOUGH
WE DO ALSO HAVE A PLAN B WHERE
SOME IF THE TIF IS NOT PROVED
THEN ABOUT HALF OF THE HOMES
WILL THE RESERVATIONS WILL BE
CANCELED AND HALF OF THE HOMES
WILL BE SOLD CLOSER TO MARKET
RATE.
>> GOTCHA.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
AND THEN JUST FOR MY
EDIFICATION ON LIKE WHEN WE
HAVE AN AIDOO PART OF LIKE MY
LARGEST CHALLENGE AGAIN I WANT
TO DO ANYTHING I CAN TO TRY TO
HELP THIS HAPPEN.
MY BIGGEST CHALLENGE ACTUALLY
HAS TO DO WITH SOME AND I'M
GOING TO SAY THIS AS BLUNTLY AS
POSSIBLE ALMOST THE SUBVERSIVE
NATURE OF KIND OF WHAT'S
BECAUSE IT'S NOT AN ACCESSORY
UNIT RIGHT.
BUT LIKE WHAT WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT IS LIKE BEING TACTICAL
ABOUT THIS SAYING THAT HEY, WE
KNOW IT'S NOT PRIMARY OH I'M
SORRY.
WE KNOW IT'S NOT ACCESSORY BUT
LIKE WE THINK THIS IS THE
FASTEST WAY TO ACCOMPLISH THIS.
BUT WORDS MATTER AND WHAT I AM
VERY CAREFUL ABOUT IS SETTING A
PRECEDENT IN WHICH WE'RE SAYING
LIKE IT DIDN'T REALLY MEAN THAT
AND THAT'S MY BIGGEST KIND
OF HANGUP WITH THIS PARTICULAR
ONE.
I WANT TO BE AS TACTICAL AS
POSSIBLE TO TRY TO MAKE THIS
HAPPEN FOR YOU.
WE'D LOVE TO BE ABLE TO CREATE
AND FRANKLY AS FAR AS THE 80
YOU LIKE LARGER RADIOS BEING
BUILT.
I'M LIKE WELL THAT'S KIND
OF WHAT WE WANTED WITH EIGHTY
YEARS FRANKLY I'LL BE PERFECTLY
HONEST WE RELAX REGULATIONS SO
THEY'D ACTUALLY BE MORE
UTILIZED SO I THINK IT'S IN
LINE WITH KIND OF WHAT WE'VE
PRINCIPALLY DISCUSSED IN THE
PAST ABOUT THE RELAXATION OF EU
REGULATIONS.
IT'S REALLY THAT KIND OF LIKE
PRIMARY ACCESSORY AND THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ACTUAL
MEANING AND THE DEFINITION THAT
CONCEPT LIKE THAT THAT TO ME IS
LIKE YIKES IS THAT THE RIGHT
THING TO DO?
WHAT I DON'T WANT TO DO IS SET
A PRECEDENT FOR SOMEBODY
ARGUING WELL I DIDN'T REALLY
MEAN THAT BUT YOU DID IT
ANYWAYS RIGHT.
SO THAT'S THE I THINK THE ONLY
THING THAT I'M A LITTLE BIT
HUNG UP ON OTHER THAN THAT I'M
TRYING TO THINK ABOUT HOW CAN
WE MAKE THIS HAPPEN FOR YOU?
I MEAN IS THIS A I DON'T WANT
TO CALL IT A PITY BECAUSE YOU
SAID THAT THE TIFF IS ACTUALLY
CONTINGENT UPON A REASONING.
>> RIGHT.
OR OUR TURF IS NOT CONTINGENT
AND ONLY OH, I'M SORRY.
I THOUGHT YOU HAD SAID OH I'M
SORRY.
I THOUGHT YOU SAID THAT THERE
ACTUALLY HAD TO BE NO
REASONING, CORRECT?
YEAH, THAT'S WHAT I MEANT IS
NOT CONTINGENT ON ANY REASONING
BUT BUT IT ACTUALLY REQUIRES
THAT THERE'S NO REASONING.
RIGHT.
YEAH GOT IT.
SO THAT'S THAT'S WHAT I MEANT
TO SAY.
SO OVERALL I WANTED TO GET A
BETTER SENSE OF TIMING ON
THINGS BUT HELP ME TO
UNDERSTAND ALSO JUST THIS IS
JUST FOR ME A LITTLE BIT OF THE
MECHANISM.
SO LIKE WHO'S THE WHO OWNS A
LOT AND ARE THEY LIKE A CONDO
BECAUSE IF I'M THE ONE BUYING
INTO YOU FOR EXAMPLE, LIKE AM I
RENTING DO I HAVE LIKE A
CO OWNERSHIP?
HOW DOES I'VE READ THE WEBSITE
BUT I'M TRYING TO BETTER
UNDERSTAND EXACTLY THAT
MECHANISM BY WHICH WHAT'S
COLLATERALIZE AND FINANCING AND
I'M TRYING TO BETTER UNDERSTAND
WHAT THAT LOOK LIKE A LOT IS
BECAUSE IF I HAVE IF I'M A
PROPERTY OWNER I OWN THE LOT
AND I BUILT AN EIGHTY TWO I'M
THE OWNER OF KIND OF BOTH RIGHT
.
>> WHAT HAPPENS IS A FAMILY
THAT IS BUYING THE OF YOU AND
SO SO HELP ME TO UNDERSTAND
THAT PARTICULAR MECHANISM.
SO ONE OF THE THINGS THAT WE
DISCOVERED OVER TIME WAS THAT
ALTHOUGH THE YOU CAN BE SOLD
SEPARATELY THE ASSESSOR THEN
TOLD US THAT FROM HIS
PERSPECTIVE WE WOULD NEED CONDO
MASTER DEEDS SET UP IN ORDER TO
ACTUALLY DO THAT AND GET A NEW
TAX ID.
NOW THOSE BRICK DUPLEX IS THAT
I SHOWED YOU ON STADIUM AND
SNIDER THOSE DO NOT HAVE
CONDOS.
THOSE ARE NONCONFORMING USES
NOW BECAUSE WHEN THEY WERE
SPLIT AT THE TIME A ZERO LOT
LINE WAS ALLOWED AND THEY
CREATED A TWENTY FIVE HUNDRED
SQUARE FOOT LOT WITH A ZERO LOT
LINE RUNNING DOWN THE PARTY
WALL.
YEAH.
SO I WOULD LIKE TO SEE THAT
RETURNED AT SOME POINT BUT I'M
NOT PURSUING THAT RIGHT NOW.
WE'RE JUST DOING THE CONDO
MASTER DEEDS SO EACH LOCATION
THE LOTS HAVE TO BE CONTIGUOUS
AND WE'RE SETTING UP CONDO
MASTER DEEDS AND BYLAWS AND
HIGHWAYS.
OK GOTCHA.
THAT THAT'S THAT'S MORE HELPFUL
IN READING THROUGH THE DEED
RESTRICTIONS.
AGAIN I KNOW WE'RE HERE TO
SPECIFICALLY TALK ABOUT THE
ZONING CHANGE AGAIN FROM A
TIMELINE STANDPOINT THIS IS
SIMPLY A RECOMMENDATION TO HAVE
WHETHER ADVANCED A COUNCIL OR
NOT.
AND SO BEST CASE SCENARIO WE'RE
STILL PROBABLY TWO MONTHS OUT
TO THREE MONTHS.
I DON'T KNOW STAFF.
MR. LEONARD, WHAT DOES THAT
TIMELINE LOOK LIKE?
>> AGAIN, I JUST WANT TO BE AS
PRACTICAL AND LIKE REAL AS
POSSIBLE.
LUTZ EVEN IF THIS COMES TO A
VOTE, IT STILL ADVANCES TO
COUNCIL.
RIGHT.
SO YOU STILL HAVE TO BE
ADVANCING TO COUNCIL FOR THEIR
SECOND SEPTEMBER MEETING FOR
FIRST READING AND THAT WERE
TEED UP FOR THE SECOND
OCTOBER MEETING FOR A SECOND
READING AT A PUBLIC HEARING IF
IF APPROVED AT FIRST READING
OK, GOT IT.
>> UNDERSTOOD.
AND THEN LIKE YOU GUYS HAVE THE
POLICY UDC CAN GO THROUGH THAT
PROCESS.
SO JUST JUST WANT TO SET THAT
LEVEL OF EXPECTATION FOR I'M
AWARE OF THAT.
OK, COOL AGAIN I AM SUPPORTIVE
OF THIS OF WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO
ACCOMPLISH.
MY BIGGEST HANG UP IS JUST IN
THE HOUSE AGAIN I KEEP COMING
BACK TO I DON'T
A BETTER WORD
FOR IT BUT FEELS A LITTLE
SUBVERSIVE TO SAY LIKE IT'S
IT'S ACCESSORY BUT IT'S NOT
REALLY RIGHT THAT THAT'S MY
ONLY KIND OF HANGUP.
AND SO WITH THAT I'M GOING TO
SEE A TABLE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU COMMISSIONER LEE.
COMMISSIONER MILLS DIDN'T ADAMS
THEN BE THANKS AGAIN.
IT'S RARE THAT THERE IS PRETTY
UNANIMOUS SUPPORT FROM THE
LETTERS THAT WE GET AND
DISCUSSION IN.
RIGHT.
SO LIKE I AGREE THAT THIS NEEDS
TO HAPPEN AND I'M TRYING TO
FIGURE OUT HOW BECAUSE AS I
SAID ON OAKIE I HAVE SIMILAR
SENSE OF LIKE WHAT DO WE MEAN
BY ACCESSORY?
SO I'VE BEEN TRYING TO COME UP
WITH TWO POTENTIAL SOLUTIONS
AND I THINK THEY SOLVE
DIFFERENT PROBLEMS OF IN THE
STAFF'S RECOMMENDATION OF THE
WHY NOT SO ONE ACTUALLY
COMMISSIONER DISH DIDN'T WE NOT
SITTING BY EACH OTHER TODAY SO
SHE DIDN'T SEE MY NOTES.
>> THAT'S THE SECOND ONE WHICH
IS MAYBE WHAT WE DO IS JUST
CHANGE THE DEFINITION OVERALL
FOR YEARS SO LONG AS THE TO
INCREASE THE SQUARE FOOTAGE TO
SEVENTEEN HUNDRED SQUARE FEET
SO LONG AS IT'S AND I WOULD I
WOULD ADD SO LONG AS THE EDU IS
NOT LARGER THAN THE PRINCIPLE
UNIT WHICH LIKE EQUAL TO MORE
LARGER SEEMS TO GET YOU WHAT
YOU WANT.
IT MAKES ACCESSORY RIGHT.
I THINK IN THAT SITUATION THE
WAY THAT I DRAFTED IT LIKE IT
IT DOESN'T HAVE TO HAVE THE
PORTABLE COMPONENT.
IT COULD HAVE THE AFFORDABLE
COMPONENT EVEN THOUGH WE DON'T
KNOW ABOUT THE ENFORCEABILITY.
>> BUT I HAVE BEEN ON A
LEARNING SHOW LONG ENOUGH THAT
I WAS HERE FOR YOUR DISCUSSION
ABOUT WHAT THOSE SQUARE
FOOTAGES OUGHT TO BE AT.
>> AND ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
WE HAVEN'T DISCUSSED IS THAT
ACTUALLY THAT SIX HUNDRED AND
EIGHT HUNDRED SQUARE FEET ARE
EVEN MORE LIMITED BECAUSE FOR
THE EDU IT'S THAT OR IT CANNOT
EXCEED THE FOOTPRINT, NOT THE
TOTAL SQUARE FOOTAGE BUT THE
FOOTPRINT OF THE PRIMARY UNIT.
SO IF YOU HAVE IF YOUR CURRENT
UNIT IS SIX HUNDRED LET'S SAY
IT'S FOURTEEN HUNDRED SQUARE
FEET EVEN IF YOU ARE IN A LARGE
LOT I THINK IF I'M READING THE
CODE RIGHT YOU'RE YOU'RE NOT
ALLOWED TO HAVE ANYTHING LARGER
THAN IT'S LET'S SAY IT'S SEVEN
BITS IT'S FOURTEEN HUNDRED FOOT
TWO STORIES YOU CAN'T HAVE
ANYTHING LARGER THAN A 700
SQUARE FOOT 82 IS THAT MR LENAR
IS NODDING SO I DID READ THAT
SO IN FACT WE WOULD NEED AN
ADDITIONAL CHANGE TO WHAT WAS
PROPOSED BECAUSE WE WOULD ALSO
HAVE TO STRIKE THAT IT'S IT'S A
BRACKETED A IN THE IN THE
CODE THAT GIVES THAT
STIPULATION LIKE IT'S SO I'M
RECOGNIZING THAT THAT'S THAT'S
A SIMPLE CHANGE BUT I WOULD
APPLY IT KIND OF EVERYWHERE.
>> I MEAN THE OTHER ONE WHAT I
DON'T LIKE ABOUT THAT IS THAT
YOU STILL HAVE THE LIMITATION
ON OCCUPANCY WHICH IS NOT A
PROBLEM FOR YOU BUT ACTUALLY
AND I KNOW THIS IS
CONTROVERSIAL BUT YOU ALSO HAVE
A LIMITATION ON SHORT TERM
RENTALS.
>> IF THIS IS YOUR PRIMARY
RESIDENCE, YOU ARE ALLOWED TO
OFFER IT UP AS A SHORT TERM
RENTAL WHICH CAN HELP PEOPLE
NOT YOU CAN NO, NO, NO.
IN NORMAL SITUATIONS IN A
NORMAL HOUSE IN A NOT EDU YOU
COULD OFFER UP YOUR PRINCIPAL
DWELLING WHETHER YOU'RE THE
OWNER OR THE RENTER AS AN EDU.
>> YOU CANNOT DO THAT IF I'M IN
SORRY SORRY AS A SHORT TERM
RENTAL YOU CANNOT DO THAT IF
IT'S AN EIGHTY RIGHT.
EVEN IF YOU ARE THE OWNER LIKE
YOU CANNOT DO THAT AND SO
THAT'S THAT'S ONE OF THOSE
OTHER LITTLE THINGS THAT LIKE
BY CALLING SENADA YOU ARE YOU
ARE FOR SO LONG AS THAT
STIPULATION IS ALWAYS IN OUR
ZONING ORDINANCE YOU ARE
FOREVER LOCKING IN BOTH.
YOU ARE FOREVER LOCKING THAT
IN.
AND SO THAT'S WHY MY SECOND
APPROACH IS TO JUST JUST LIKE
WE CREATED A DEFINITION FOR
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS AND
SAID HERE'S WHERE ACCESSORY
DWELLING UNITS ARE ALLOWED.
WE HAVE A DEFINITION ACTUALLY
FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING DWELLING
UNITS AND WE COULD JUST SAY FOR
AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS WE
CARE ABOUT ONE UP TO SEVENTEEN
HUNDRED SQUARE FEET ON ANY LONG
PERIOD LIKE LIKE WHAT ARE THEY
MOTION FOR THAT I WOULD SAY I'M
SUGGESTING THAT THAT'S ANOTHER
APPROACH THAT COMES WITH THE
UNINFORMED I GUESS THIS IS
WHERE IT RELAXES THOSE
RESTRICTIONS RIGHT.
BUT IT COMES WITH THE
ENFORCEABILITY AND SO I DON'T
THINK THAT STAFF IS GOING TO BE
ANY MORE EXCITED ABOUT THAT
BECAUSE IT'S STILL IT'S STILL
LACKS THE ENFORCEABILITY THAT
YOU BROUGHT UP IN THE FIRST
PLACE.
SO BUT MAYBE I'LL STOP AND SAY
I MEAN ARE YOU INTERESTED IN
PUTTING TOGETHER EMOTION?
SO WHEN I COME BACK AFTER
WEATHERBEE WE CAN COME BACK TO
YOU TO SEE IF YOU WOULD LIKE TO
PROPOSE SOMETHING.
I WOULD LIKE TO ASK STAFF IF
EITHER OF THE WHAT THEY THINK
OF EITHER OF THOSE POTENTIAL
SOLUTIONS WILL COME BACK TO IT
AND THEN ASK STETHEM DID YOU
WANT TO CONTINUE?
>> NO.
THOSE ARE THE TWO THINGS THAT I
HAD GREAT COMMISSIONER ADAMS.
I'LL TRY TO KEEP THIS QUIET SO
THAT DOWNSIDE RISK
OF RECOMMENDING DENIAL IS THAT
THESE UNITS WON'T GET BUILT OR
THEY'LL GET BUILT SLOWLY OR
THEY'LL GET BUILT IN A WAY THAT
FUNCTIONALLY DENIES HOME
OWNERSHIP, HOME OWNERSHIP SIZE
OF THE STRUCTURE TO PEOPLE WHO
WANT TO BUY A HOME THAT'S
CLOSER TO SEVENTEEN HUNDRED
FEET.
THEY DON'T WANT TO SELL IT TO
YOU.
THEY WANT TO START OUR HOME.
THE DOWNSIDE RISK
OF RECOMMENDING APPROVAL IS
THAT I GET DEED RESTRICTED USE
A LOT BUY RIGHT THAT ARE BIGGER
THAN WHAT WE CURRENTLY ALLOW
BUT STILL SMALLER THAN ANY
DUPLEX OR SINGLE FAMILY HOME
THAT'S CURRENTLY BEING
CONSTRUCTED IN THE CITY AND
THAT SOMEONE MIGHT GAIN THAT
RULE TO BUILD THEM WITHOUT
BEING SERIOUS ABOUT ENFORCING
THE DEED RESTRICTION.
I CARE ABOUT THAT FIRST RISK.
I CARE ABOUT THE UNITS GETTING
BUILT OR UNITS OR DISRUPTING
THE WORK OF THE LAND TRUST AN
ORGANIZATION THAT IT SEEMS LIKE
THE COMMUNITY AND THE CITY
COUNCIL AND EVERYBODY WANTS TO
SUPPORT.
I THINK THE WAY WE SHOW THAT WE
WANT TO SUPPORT THEM IS BY
APPROVING THIS TONIGHT OR
RECOMMENDING APPROVAL.
I DON'T CARE AT ALL ABOUT THE
SECOND RISK IF IF I RECOMMEND
NO BECAUSE OF THE RISK THAT
SOME PERSON MIGHT COME ALONG
AND GAME AND BUILD AN EU THAT
IS STILL A THOUSAND SQUARE FEET
SMALLER AND CERTAINLY CHEAPER
THAN THE DUPLEXES I'M SEEING
GOING UP IN MY NEIGHBORHOOD.
FREHLEY RIGHT.
THE LAW THE LAW SHOULD CARE
ABOUT THOSE TWO THINGS SORT
OF EQUALLY RIGHT RIGHT NOW THE
LAW ALLOWS ME TO GO INTO WATER
HILL AND KNOCK DOWN A SINGLE
FAMILY HOME AND BUILD TWO
MASSIVE LUXURY DUPLEXES AND
IT'S HAPPENING ALL THE TIME.
SO IF I'M IF WE'RE GOING TO
RECOMMEND IF WE'RE GOING TO
RECOMMEND DENYING THIS BECAUSE
OF THE RISK, SOMEBODY MIGHT
GAME IT AND BUILD A SEVEN
HUNDRED SQUARE FOOT EIGHTY YOU
LIKE I DON'T UNDERSTAND THAT
COMMISSIONER WETHERBEE AND THEN
AFTER COMMISSIONER WHETHER I
WANT TO DO A TABLE CHECK TO SEE
IF WE HAVE A MOTION OR A PATH
FORWARD IN OUR DISCUSSION.
>> COMMISSIONER WEATHERBEE.
SO MY ISSUES WITH THIS AND WE
ALSO ANOTHER ONE AT THE ZIBA
WHICH WAS WITH THE BASEMENT AND
IS AGAIN TO COMMISSIONER LADIES
LIKE KIND OF TRYING TO SUBVERT
WHAT AND THAT THAT IS A LOADED
TERM.
SO I DON'T I DON'T WANT TO
BECAUSE WE ABSOLUTELY ALL WANT
THESE TO HAPPEN AND SO IT'S
REALLY EASY FOR PEOPLE TO SAY
WELL JUST APPROVE IT THEN
BECAUSE WHY ARE WE DITHERING?
WHY AREN'T WE JUST APPROVING
IT?
BUT TO ME ONE OF THINGS AND I
KNOW THERE'S A LOT OF PEOPLE
WHO WON'T BELIEVE THIS BUT
THERE IS A CERTAIN TRUST IN OUR
POSITIONS HERE THAT WE WON'T
JUST SLIDE SOMETHING THROUGH
WITHOUT PEOPLE KNOWING ABOUT IT
.
>> AND WE HAVE A LOT OF PEOPLE
WE GET A LOT OF COMMENTS AND
QUESTIONS THAT ARE LIKE
POSITIVE AND POSITIVE PLAN.
YOU KNOW, YOU'RE TRYING TO
YOU'RE TRYING TO SUBVERT THIS.
YOU'RE TRYING TO PUT MORE
BUILDINGS IN OUR NEIGHBORHOODS.
YOU'RE TRYING TO DO THIS AND
THEN THIS COMES THROUGH AND
IT'S LIKE THE PLAN FULL SPEED
AHEAD AND IT'S IT'S HARD FOR ME
TO SAY THIS ONE'S OK BUT WE'RE
GOING TO SPEND TWO AND A HALF
YEARS AND LOTS OF PUBLIC
COMMENT ON THE THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
>> BUT WE ARE JUST GOING TO
SORT OF SAY, YOU KNOW, ADIOS TO
TWO FAMILY STRUCTURES IN EVERY
RESIDENTIAL ZONING CODE IS OK
AND AND SO IT'S A LITTLE WE'VE
ALREADY GONE THEY'RE HALFWAY
WITH ADA SO I YOU KNOW, DO I
CARE IF SOMEBODY BUILDS A
SECOND STRUCTURE?
NO, I THINK THIS IS GREAT.
>> I THINK WE COULD BUILD FOUR
I I WOULD LIKE TO ALLOW PLAYS
YOU KNOW ORGANIZATIONS LIKE THE
COMMUNITY INTEREST TO BE ABLE
TO BUILD MULTIPLE I'VE SEEN
SOME OF THE LOTS AND THERE SOME
OF THESE LOTS ARE BIG AND COULD
HAVE MULTIPLE DWELLING UNITS
NOT JUST TO BUT I THINK THE ADA
IS IS TRICKY LIKE WHERE THIS IS
WE'RE KIND OF CHANGING
SOMETHING THAT WE'VE WE HAD A
LOT OF COMMUNITY DISCUSSION
ABOUT AND SET AT A CERTAIN
SPECIFICITY AND AND THIS FEELS
JUST NOT QUITE LIKE THE WAY WE
SHOULD DO THIS MOVING FORWARD
AT IN THIS WAY.
BUT I DID HAVE A QUESTION FOR
STAFF.
SO THE OCCUPANCY LIMIT THIS
WOULD LIMIT ADULT OCCUPANCY IN
TWO DWELLING LIKE WITH THE TWO
DWELLINGS TOGETHER
TO FOUR
PEOPLE IN AN HOUR.
ONE LOT CORRECT?
THAT'S RIGHT.
YEAH.
FOR ADULTS.
>> SO IF I HAVE A COUPLE IN ONE
HOUSE AND A COUPLE IN THE OTHER
HOUSE AND A 17 YEAR OLD KID ONE
THAT KID AND YOU EACH PERSON OR
EACH GROUP OWNS THOSE HOUSES
AND THAT SEVENTEEN YEAR OLD KID
TURNS 18.
WHAT ARE THE IMPLICATIONS
OF THAT LIKE THAT?
I DON'T UNDERSTAND THAT SEEMS
TRICKY NOW I GUESS YOU COULD
SAY IN OUR ONE IF YOU HAD A SET
OF TRIPLETS WHO TURNED 18 AND
THEN YOU HAD FIVE ADULTS AND
BUT LIKE WHAT YOU'RE TWO
HOUSING UNITS AND FOUR PEOPLE
FOR ADULTS IS JUST REALLY
LIMITED.
SO IT IS ONE I JUST WANT TO BE
HONEST IT IS INCREDIBLY HARD TO
ENFORCE.
I THINK THAT THAT'S WHY THE
QUESTION HAS COME UP WHETHER OR
NOT THAT'S STILL THE RIGHT
MCKENNIS.
BUT KEEP IN MIND WE DEFINE
FAMILY IN A COUPLE OF DIFFERENT
WAYS.
WE DEFINE FAMILY AS UNRELATED
INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE A FAMILY AS
A SINGLE FUNCTIONING HOUSEHOLD
WITH THEIR OFFSPRING.
AND SO I THINK THAT WHEN YOU'RE
TALKING ABOUT A RELATIVELY
SMALL ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT
SIX HUNDRED OR EIGHT SQUARE
FEET, THE LIKELIHOOD THAT YOU
ARE GOING TO EXCEED THAT IS
ARGUABLY NOT ABSOLUTE BUT
ARGUABLY LESS LIKELY THAN A
SEVENTEEN HUNDRED SQUARE FOOT
AND PRIMARY ABOUT BUT AND
THERE'S NO REAL MECHANISM FOR
OTHER THAN SOMEBODY COMPLAINING
THAT THERE'S TOO MANY PEOPLE
ARE SO YEAH I MEAN THAT IT'S
VERY CHALLENGING.
WE ATTEMPT TO DO IT THROUGH OUR
RENTAL HOUSING INSPECTION BUT
THROUGH OWNERSHIP IT IS EVEN
MORE CHALLENGING.
THANK YOU MR. COMMISSIONER
WETHERBEE.
OK, THANK YOU.
COMMISSIONER NORTON ASKED TO
SPEAK AGAIN.
IS THE TABLE OK IF THAT'S A
SHORT ONE SO THAT I CAN TRY TO
GET US I MADE COMMENTS ABOUT
SETTING UP SOMETHING TO ALLOW
PEOPLE TO GAME THE SYSTEM AND
THAT'S A CONCERN AND I WOULD
POINT OUT IF IF WE SET THIS UP
IN A WAY THAT YOU CAN'T DO
SHORT TERM RENTALS ON THIS
THING, THAT WOULD BE A GOOD
THING BECAUSE WE'RE NOT TRYING
TO CREATE AFFORDABLE SHORT TERM
RENTALS.
SO THAT'S NOT PROBLEMATIC TO
ME.
I'M REALLY TROUBLED.
I'M NOT THE CITY'S LEGAL
COUNSEL BUT I AM A PLANNING
LAWYER AND I'M VERY CONCERNED
ABOUT THE INTEGRITY OF THE LAW
AND I THINK I WANT TO REITERATE
WHAT COMMISSIONER WETHERBEE
SAID.
I THINK WE'RE HEADING DOWN A
BAD ROAD IF WE DO THINGS FOR
EXPEDIENCY BECAUSE WE REALLY
OUTCOME THAT'S BENDING THE LAW
IN A WAY THAT THE LAW IS NOT
WHERE IT GOES.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS HAVE
LONG BEEN ESTABLISHED IN THE
LAW.
THEIR ACCESSORY THE CUSTOMARY
AND INCIDENTAL TO A PRIMARY USE
THAT'S WELL-ESTABLISHED IN THE
PLANNING LAW THIS IS A TWO
HOUSING UNIT REZONING.
IT'S TAKING PLACE.
IT'S A FUNDAMENTALLY DIFFERENT
THING.
I WOULD RATHER COME UP WITH A
MECHANISM TO ALLOW A DUAL
AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNIT AND
FIGURE OUT THE PARAMETERS
OF THAT AND MAKE THAT WORK AND
TALK TO THE CITY'S LEGAL
COUNSEL ABOUT WHAT COULD WE PUT
INTO THE ZONING CODE TEXT THAT
WOULD ENSURE THINGS HAPPEN
RATHER THAN SAYING WELL WE'RE
GOING TO DO IT AND WE DON'T
REALLY CARE IF IT DOESN'T GET
ENFORCED.
I MEAN THAT'S ANOTHER REALLY
BAD DIRECTION TO HEAD DOWN.
WE'RE GOING TO DROP LAWS AND
THEY'RE GOING TO GET BROKEN.
BUT THAT'S OK BECAUSE WE LIKE
THE OUTCOME.
WELL, THAT'S NOT A GOOD WAY TO
DO PLANNING LAW SO AGAIN, I
REALLY WANT TO HELP YOU BECAUSE
I REALLY I REALLY UNDERSTAND
THE PASSION THAT YOU HAVE AND
WHAT YOU'RE TRYING TO GO.
I JUST DON'T THINK THIS IS THE
RIGHT WAY TO DO IT.
I THINK IT'S IT'S UNDERMINING
THE INTEGRITY OF WHAT ZONING IS
SHOULD BE.
SO I CAN'T SUPPORT IT FOR THAT
REASON.
>> THANK YOU, COMMISSIONER
NORTON.
SO IF I COULD TRY TO SUMMARIZE
WHAT I'VE HEARD AND THEN SEE IF
WE CAN FIND A PATH FOR US AND
FOR OUR PETITION.
SO ONE MR. LEONARD SUGGESTED
THAT WE NOT TAKE UP THIS
RESOLUTION AND INSTEAD JUST
DUPLEXES IN OUR ONE CITY WIDE
TWO WE COULD INCREASE THE
DEFINITION IN THE UDC OF A
POSSESSORY DWELLING UNIT TO
SEVENTEEN HUNDRED SQUARE FEET.
WE COULD ADD OR UTILIZE THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNIT
DEFINITION THAT ALREADY EXISTS
IN THE UDC AND AMEND THIS
AMENDMENT TO UTILIZE THAT WITH
SIGNIFICANT MODIFICATIONS TO
THE EXISTING DEFINITION.
>> YES, WE'D HAVE TO MODIFY IN
ORDER TO BRING IT UP BUT IT
ALREADY EXISTS AND AND IN THE
UDC AND SO WE COULD JUST
LEVERAGE IT AND AMEND WHAT'S
BEFORE SOMETHING THAT I WAS
THINKING OF THAT I DON'T THINK
SOMEONE SAID OUT LOUD THOUGH I
BELIEVE COMMISSIONER MILLER'S
GOT CLOSE TO IT WHICH IS WE
EITHER RENAME ACCESSORY
DWELLING UNIT TO ADDITIONAL
DWELLING UNIT OR CREATE A NEW
CATEGORY WHICH IS ADDITIONAL
DWELLING UNIT WHICH COULD
ADDRESS COMMISSIONER NORTON'S
CONCERN.
>> COMMISSIONER LEE FOR
AFFORDABLE NO ACTUALLY I'M
CREATING A NEW ONE SO
AFFORDABLE IS ALREADY THERE BUT
WE WOULD ADD JUST ADDITIONAL
AND THEN WHAT?
I THINK THERE IS SUPPORT AT THE
TABLE AND I WOULD LOVE STAFF TO
NOTE ESPECIALLY YOU, MR.
LEONARD, I THINK WE REALLY WANT
TO GET RID OF THIS UNRELATED
PEOPLE AND ADULT RESTRICTION
FROM OUR UDC.
IT IS JUST FUNDAMENTAL
PROBLEMATIC.
SO COMMISSIONER MILLS, YOU WERE
SORT OF INTIMATING A PATH
FORWARD.
WOULD YOU LIKE TO TAKE THE
FLOOR AND OFFER THAT OR DO WE
WANT TO GO BACK TO THE PROPOSAL
THAT'S IN FRONT OF US AND DO A
UNAM AND VOTE UP OR DOWN?
I KNOW THAT'S A LOT OF PRESSURE
ON YOU BUT WELL, I DRAFTED THE
LANGUAGE OF THE SLIGHT
MODIFICATION OF THE EXISTING
JUST TO ADD IN BUT AN EDU WITH
THE MAX GROSS FLOOR AREA
OF SEVENTEEN HUNDRED SQUARE
FEET.
BUT IN ANY CASE NOT LARGER THAN
THE TOTAL FLOOR AREA OF THE
PRIMARY DWELLING UNIT.
I THINK THAT THAT FILLS THAT
LOOPHOLE MAKES IT CLEAR THAT
THAT THEY AT LEAST HAVE TO BE
EQUAL, YOU KNOW AND SO THE YEAH
THE THE ACCESSORY DWELLING
CAN'T BE LARGER THAN THE THAN
THE PRINCIPLE UNIT I REALLY
LIKE.
I'M SO GLAD THAT YOU CAME UP
WITH THE ADDITIONAL THAT'S WHAT
I HAD WRITTEN DOWN LIKE
ADDITIONAL DWELLING UNIT
DEFINITION IN WHICH CASE YOU
CAN AVOID I'M NOT PREPARED TO
TO MAKE ALL THE CHANGES THAT
WOULD BE REQUIRED IN TERMS
OF WHAT FOLLOWS OF THE OPTIONS
DISCUSSED, I FEEL THE MOST
COMFORTABLE HONESTLY WITH THAT
PERSONALLY.
BUT IF YOU WOULD LIKE ME TO
MAKE THE MOTION I'M A SIMPLE
AMENDMENT.
>> I'M HAPPY TO I I WOULD LIKE
YOU TO GO AHEAD AND MAKE A
MOTION IF YOU ARE PREPARED AND
YOU HAVE A SECOND WE CAN
DISCUSS THAT BRIEFLY AND THEN
WE CAN VOTE IT UP OR DOWN AND
THEN IF THAT PREVAILS THAT
SHOULD GIVE YOU WHAT YOU NEED
TO GO FORWARD TO CITY COUNCIL.
IF IT FAILS, THEN WE COME BACK
AND THEN WE FIGURE OUT WHETHER
WE JUST DO A STRAIGHT UP OR
DOWN VOTE UNAMENDED.
OK, SO THE THAT MAKES SENSE TO
ME.
IT'S SO THIS IS AGAIN TO BE
CLEAR.
>> YEAH I'M SORRY SOMEONE ELSE
OK OK SO THE MOTION THAT I
WOULD LIKE TO MAKE IS TO AMEND
THE LANGUAGE TO AFTER COLEN IN
HERE IN THE CURRENT IN THE
CURRENT DRAFT DRAFT.
>> OK THANK YOU TO SAY THAT WE
WOULD MAKE THE INNER CITY
PLANNING COMMISSION HEREBY
RECOMMENDS THAT THE MAYOR AND
CITY COUNCIL APPROVE THE
FOLLOWING AMENDMENTS SECTION
FIFTEEN POINT SIXTEEN POINT SIX
POINT D ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT
ADD SUBSECTION SEVEN TO ALLOW
USE WITH A MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA
OF SEVENTEEN HUNDRED SQUARE
FEET COMMA BUT IN ANY CASE NOT
LARGER THAN THE TOTAL FLOOR
AREA OF THE PRIMARY DWELLING
UNIT COMMA IF BOTH THE
PRINCIPLE UNIT AND THE EDU ARE
DEEMED RESTRICTED AND CONTINUES
AS INITIALLY RECOMMENDED IT WAS
THE IT WAS THE ADDING IN THERE
THAT THAT SEVENTEEN HUNDRED
SQUARE FEET CANNOT BE ALLOWED
UP TO SEVENTEEN HUNDRED SQUARE
FEET SO LONG AS THE PRINCIPAL
DWELLING UNIT IS AT LEAST
SEVENTEEN HUNDRED SQUARE FEET.
IF IT'S NOT THEN YOU SHOULD
ONLY BE OH WELL I GUESS WE CAN
CHANGE IT.
GOOD QUESTION.
IT WOULD ONLY BE NOT THE AREA
OF THE PRINCIPAL DWELLING UNIT
OK DO WE HAVE A SECOND
ALSO.
>> THANK YOU.
UM SO NOW WE'RE IN DISCUSSION
OF THE MOTION AS AMENDED BY
COMMISSIONER LFS AND IF WE
COULD LET'S TRY TO LIMIT OUR
COMMENTS TO ABOUT A MINUTE AND
A HALF.
I HAVE A TIMER I WILL KEEP
TRACK WHO WOULD LIKE TO START
BUT DO YOU WANT TO CALL THE
QUESTION.
>> ALL RIGHT COMMISSIONER I
GUESS MY QUESTION TO YOU
COMMISSIONER MILT'S OF THE MANY
THINGS THAT HAVE OF THE MANY
CONCERNS WHICH WERE VOICED AT
THE TABLE THIS ONE GETS AT THIS
IDEA THAT AT LEAST WE COULD
STILL UNDERSTAND ONE OF THE
STRUCTURES TO BE ACCESSORY TO
THE OTHER.
>> OK, THAT IS THE ONLY ONE
THAT IT SOLVES OF ALL OF THE
CONCERNS BUT IT DOES SOLVE THAT
DEFINITION ONLY IT WOULD BE
ACCESSORY AND YOU'RE KEEPING
THE AFFORDABILITY REQUIREMENT
AS THE MOTION KEEPS THE
AFFORDABILITY AS I PROPOSED IT
KEEPS THE AFFORDABILITY
REQUIREMENT RATINGS
COMMISSIONER OLLI OH AGAIN I
THINK THAT SOLVES AT LEAST SOME
OF MY RESOLUTION OF RESERVATION
ABOUT THIS CONCEPT OF ONE BEING
PRIMARY LIKE ONE IS JUST
POTENTIALLY LARGER.
SO I'M ACTUALLY FRIENDLY TO
THAT PARTICULAR AMENDMENT.
SO SO THANK YOU.
I'M IN FAVOR.
THANKS.
>> ANY OTHER DISCUSSION.
OK COMMISSIONER I'M SORRY AND
WHAT ABOUT THIS MAY NOT EXCEED
THE GROUND LEVEL FLOOR AREA
OF THE PRIMARY DWELLING UNIT?
WE KEEP THAT YEAH WE KEEP THAT
IN THAT'S WHY IT'S THE TOTAL
FLOOR AREA RATHER THAN THE
GROUND LEVEL FLOOR AREA.
>> SO THAT'S ACTUALLY THE
DISTINCTION.
THE TOTAL FLOOR AREA
COMMISSIONER DISH I'M NOT GOING
TO SUPPORT THIS BECAUSE I DON'T
THINK THAT THE DEED RESTRICTION
PART IS ENFORCEABLE AND I DON'T
THINK THAT IT IS SOMETHING THAT
THE UDC THINKS ABOUT USE.
AND SO THIS IS KIND OF MAKING A
FALSE PROMISE LIKE HERE WE'RE
GOING TO GET YOU AFFORDABLE
HOUSING THIS WAY I DON'T KNOW
WE'RE GOING TO GET MORE HOUSING
WHICH I'M COOL WITH BUT I'M NOT
COOL WITH PRETENDING THAT WE
CAN MAKE SURE THAT IT'S
AFFORDABLE.
THANK YOU COMMISSIONER DUSH
.
IN A MOMENT I'M GOING TO SAY
YOU CAN OFFER A FRIENDLY
AMENDMENT IF YOU WANT TO STRIKE
PART
TO STRIKE THE PARTY SHE
HAS NO OBJECTION TO I COULD
OFFER THAT I YEAH I GUESS YEAH
THIS IS GOING TO COUNCIL STAFF
WILL HAVE TIME TO WEIGH IN ON
IT.
YEAH I MY FRIENDLY AMENDMENT IS
LET'S STRIKE THE DEED
RESTRICTED PART OK IS THAT
AGREEABLE TO YOU COMMISSIONER
MILLS.
IT IS BUT I WOULD JUST SUGGEST
THAT THIS SIMPLIFIES THE ENTIRE
TABLE TO SAY WHAT WE WOULD THEN
BE CHANGING THAT TABLE IN IS NO
MORE EIGHT HUNDRED SIX HUNDRED
EIGHT HUNDRED NO MORE SUB
BULLET A IT WOULD BE ALLOWING A
SEVENTEEN HUNDRED SQUARE FOOT
OPEN ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT UP
TO SEVENTEEN HUNDRED SQUARE
FOOT ANYWHERE SO LONG AS IT
DOES NOT EXCEED THE SIZE THAT I
JUST WANT TO KNOW LIKE WHAT
EVERYBODY KNOW THAT THAT IS
WHAT THE IMPLICATION OF THAT
WOULD BE.
WELL I THINK THAT IT IS THE
HONEST TRUTH ABOUT WHAT THE
OTHER ONE IS ACTUALLY DOING.
>> OK SO WE WE HAVE A FRIENDLY
AMENDMENT ON THE TABLE.
WE NEED A SECOND IS DOES IT
HAVE TO BE FRIENDLY TO ME?
>> WELL, I WAS ASKING YOU WHICH
YOU SAID US.
YEAH.
OK THEN LEA DO YOU HAVE ANY
OBJECTIONS OBJECTIONS TO THE
AMENDMENT?
>> I MEAN I GUESS YOU CAN VOTE
AGAINST THE IF YOU DO WE'LL
TAKE A WEATHERBY'S SECOND AND
SO NOW WE I NEED SOMEONE TO
KEEP TRACK OF THE MOTION AS
AMENDED.
>> SO WE'RE NOW DISCUSSING THE
AMENDMENT TO STRIKE THE
AFFORDABLE DEED RESTRICTION IS
THAT EVERYBODY'S UNDERSTANDING
OF WHERE WE ARE.
>> OK, SO WHO ARE YOU CALLING
THE QUESTION?
OK, SO THE QUESTION HAS AND
CALL SO LET'S VOTE ON THIS
FRIENDLY AMENDMENT.
>> DOES EVERYONE KNOW WHAT
WE'RE ABOUT TO VOTE ON?
OK, WE'D BE VOTING ON THAT.
WE'D BE VOTING ON STRIKE MILLS
AMENDMENT AS AMENDED BY ME
BECAUSE IF YOU AGREE THAT IT'S
A FRIENDLY AMENDMENT YOU JUST
MAKE IT AND THEN IT DOESN'T
MEAN THAT IT MEANS THAT THAT
REPLACES THE CURRENT YES STAFF
REPORT.
IT DOESN'T MEAN THAT IT'S
PASSED.
NO, IT JUST MEANS THAT THAT'S
WHAT WE'RE GOING TO THEN TAKE
UP COMPARE EVERYTHING ELSE.
BUT WE HAVE CALLED THE
QUESTIONS THAT WE CANNOT ANY
LONGER DEBATE US.
WE NEED TO VOTE.
SO I PLANNER THATCHER OK I'M
SURE SOMEONE WANTS YOU TO READ
IT.
>> SO IN THE SECOND PARAGRAPH
OF MOTION SECTION FIVE POINT
SIXTEEN POINT SIXTY ACCESSORY
DWELLING UNIT EIGHTY YOU ADD
SUBSECTION SEVEN TO ALLOW ADS
WITH A MAXIMUM GROSS FLOOR AREA
OF ONE THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED
SQUARE FEET BUT IN ANY CASE NOT
LARGER THAN THE TOTAL FLOOR
AREA OF THE PRINCIPAL DWELLING
UNIT.
OK, THAT IS WHAT WE ARE NOW
VOTING ON AND WE'LL DO A ROLL
CALL VOTE OF JUST OF THE
AMENDMENT OF THE AMENDMENT.
>> WE'RE NOT THIS IS NOT THE
FINAL PIECE.
WE'RE JUST AMENDING THE
LANGUAGE AND THEN WE WILL TAKE
THE AMENDED LANGUAGE AND THEN
DEBATE AND VOTE ON THAT.
WE DISCUSS NO BECAUSE THE
QUESTION WAS CALLED OK, ALL
RIGHT, COMMISSIONER WHITE.
YES, COMMISSIONER IBRO APRON'S
NO COMMISSIONER LEAVE NO
COMMISSIONER DISH YES.
COMMISSIONER MILLS' YES.
COMMISSIONER WETHERBEE YES.
COMMISSIONER ADAM YES.
>> COMMISSIONER NORTEN NO YOU
HAVE FIVE YESES AND THREE NOTES
THAT AMENDED LANGUAGE CHARISE
SO THAT IS THE NEW AMENDED OR
MOTION WE ARE CONSIDERING NOW
SO WE CAN IT'S ALREADY BEEN
MOVED.
IT'S ALREADY BEEN SECONDED.
IT'S ALREADY BEEN AMENDED SO IF
SOMEONE WANTS TO CALL THE
QUESTION WE CAN GO STRAIGHT TO
A VOTE OTHERWISE I'LL TAKE A
JUST A HANDFUL OF COMMENTS
BECAUSE WE'RE GETTING CLOSE TO
TEN AND WE STILL HAVE TWO MORE
AGENDA ITEMS.
SO WE'LL START WITH NORTON AND
THEN WE'LL GO TO LEAVE.
>> SO NO, THIS IS EVEN WORSE
NOW WE'RE DOING RADICAL WORK ON
DO YOU PROVISIONS THAT NOBODY
ASKED FOR THAT ALL STARTED OFF
WITH.
THIS IS ALL TO PROMOTE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND NOW
THERE'S NOTHING IN HERE THAT
SPEAKS AT ALL TO AFFORDABLE
HOUSING, WHICH IS MY CONCERN
ABOUT MAKING QUICK AMENDMENTS
TO THE ZONING CODE OUT
OF EXPEDIENCY WITHOUT THINKING
THINGS THROUGH.
SO NO, I DEFINITELY CAN'T
SUPPORT US.
IT JUST DOESN'T WE'RE DOING WAY
MORE THAN WHAT WE WERE ASKED TO
DO BASED ON A WHOLE LOT
OF ARGUMENT THAT NOW HAS
NOTHING TO DO WHAT WE WERE
ASKED TO DO FOR REASONS THAT
DON'T MATTER ANYMORE BECAUSE
OF THE WAY THE REVISION WAS
MADE.
>> COMMISSIONER LEE?
YEAH, I'LL HAVE TO SECOND THAT
SENTIMENT NOW WHAT WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT IS DRASTICALLY
JUST AMENDING THE ADA.
I GUESS IT'S NOT TERRIBLY
DRASTIC.
IT'S EIGHT HUNDRED SQUARE FEET
RELATIVE UP TO SEVENTEEN
HUNDRED AND SO LONG AS THE
PRIMARY STRUCTURE I GUESS YEAH.
YEAH IT'S PRETTY DRASTIC IT'S
MORE THAN DOUBLE SO AGAIN NOT
HAVING THIS REQUIREMENT OF THE
AFFORDABLE LIKE I'M NOT SURE
HOW THAT JUST HAPPENED.
I CAN'T BE IN SUPPORT OF THIS I
GUESS THAT'S KIND OF WHERE I'M
AT IT IT'S JUST BROADEN THE
SCOPE WAY FURTHER AND NOW WE'RE
JUST TALKING ABOUT A UNION SO
HOW SO THAT'S WHERE I'M AT
RIGHT NOW.
>> THANKS COMMISSIONER ADAMS.
OH SORRY I DIDN'T LOOK TO MY
LEFT COMMISSIONER WEATHERBEE
AND THEN TO THE POINT IS THAT'S
WHAT WE WERE TALKING ABOUT
BEFORE BECAUSE THERE'S NO REAL
MECHANISM TO DO THE DEED
RESTRICTED TO THE AFFORDABLE
DEED RESTRICTION.
SO IF IF WE'RE VOTING TO
SUPPORT THIS BECAUSE OF THE
AFFORDABLE DEED RESTRICTION AND
WE HAVE NO MECHANISM TO ENFORCE
THAT THEN THIS IS ACTUALLY WHAT
WE ARE VOTING ON.
COMMISSIONER ADAMS, I LIKE THIS
EVEN MORE AND THE REASON THAT I
MEAN THE LOGIC OF WHAT I JUST
SAID SUPPORTS VOTING YES FOR US
.
I DON'T THINK IT'S WHAT WE WHAT
WE WERE ASKED TO DO BUT IT ALSO
WORKS BECAUSE IT SAYS YES TO
THE LAND TRUST COMMISSIONER
ABMS I ABSOLUTELY LOVE THE
OUTCOME.
I CANNOT SUPPORT THE PROCESS.
I FEEL LIKE REALLY TROUBLED BY
IT.
SO I'M GONNA IT'S LIKE VERY
PAINFUL FOR ME BUT I THINK
WITHOUT THE AFFORDABILITY
COMPONENT I CAN'T SUPPORT IT.
>> I'M SORRY
.
>> ARE WE READY TO VOTE?
CAN I ASK WHAT HAPPENS NEXT?
>> WE'RE GOING TO VOTE ON THE
SORRY IF DOES THIS GO ON TO
COUNCIL REGARDLESS OF THE
OUTCOME?
YES, SORRY THAT WAS MY DECISION
REGARDLESS OF THE WE ARE MAKING
A RECOMMENDATION TO COUNCIL AND
THEY MAY OR MAY NOT READ OUR
MINUTES OR OUR DISCUSSION
BECAUSE OUR MINUTES SHOW UP IN
THEIR AGENDAS ABOUT A MONTH
AFTER WE HAVE OUR MEETINGS.
SO THEY MAY OR MAY NOT SEE THIS
THIS DISCUSSION BUT I IMAGINE
THEY'LL HAVE A STAFF REPORT.
OK, GIVEN OK CAN I ASK ONE MORE
QUESTION?
>> OF COURSE AGAIN I HAD TO
MULTIPLE SOLUTIONS THE OTHER
BLIND WAS SHARED HERE WHICH IS
TO CREATE A SEPARATE DEFINITION
AND I WOULD RECOGNIZE THAT IT
MAY SUFFER FROM THE SAME
ENFORCEABILITY.
SO I DON'T KNOW HOW FOLKS ARE
FEELING ABOUT WEATHER ABOUT
THAT AND SO I'M CURIOUS BECAUSE
PERSONALLY I THINK I WORRY
ABOUT ENFORCEABILITY AND ALSO
THINK THAT IT IS TRUE.
I APPRECIATE THAT IT IS VERY
CLEAR IN THE IT COULD BE VERY
CLEAR IN THE DEFINITION WHAT WE
ARE ADVANCING AND SO I'M JUST
CURIOUS IF OTHER PEOPLE WOULD
SUGGEST THAT AUDITION OR WANT
TO MAKE A MOTION FOR THAT
AUDITION.
CAN YOU JUST FOR THE SAKE
OF CLARITY DEFINE THE
DEFINITION ADDITIONAL DWELLING
UNIT OR ADDITIONAL AFFORDABLE
DWELLING UNIT?
>> I SEE.
WELL, IT CAN'T JUST BE
ATTAINABLE.
>> WE COULD USE ATTAINABLE
KIEU.
SURE.
AND YOU CAN MAKE A MOTION
BECAUSE WE STILL HAVE THE
PRIMARY MOTION NOW THAT WE ARE
ABOUT TO VOTE ON.
SO IF YOU WANT TO AMEND THIS
YOU MAY OTHERWISE SOMEONE CAN
CALL THE QUESTION OR I'LL SEE
IF WE'RE READY TO VOTE
.
>> I WOULD PROPOSE I DON'T WANT
TO I THINK WHAT I'M STRUGGLING
WITH IS I DON'T WANT TO DRAFT
WHAT ALL OF THE THINGS ARE
RIGHT NOW.
>> SURE.
BECAUSE THIS IS NOT THE TIME
OF NIGHT TO DO THAT.
IT IS NOT YOU MAY BE RIGHT
THERE.
>> SO SO YOU ARE NOT MAKING A
PROPOSAL THE BUT I'M THE ONLY
PROPOSAL THAT I WOULD MAKE IS I
SOME I WANT TO SEND US BACK TO
SAY WHAT THE STAFF THINK ABOUT
IN ADDITION LIKE CREATING A
DEFINITION OF ADDITIONAL
ATTAINABLE HOUSING UNITS TO ADD
I WOULD LOVE TO SEE THE
ANALYSIS OF THAT AND SOME DRAFT
LANGUAGE BUT I DON'T THAT TAKES
TIME.
IT DOES.
YOU WOULD BE MOVING FOR A
POSTPONEMENT WITH THOSE
REQUESTS AND THEN IT WOULD COME
BACK AT A DATE CERTAIN RIGHT.
>> AND BECAUSE OF THAT ACTUALLY
OUR TYPICAL STANDARD IS IF
BEFORE I PROPOSE THAT WE OFTEN
ASK THE PETITIONER WHAT YOU'RE
HEARING KONSTA OUR NATION OVER
THE CURRENT WHAT'S ON THE TABLE
AND A PROPOSAL TO POTENTIALLY
POSTPONE WE KNOW TIME IS MONEY
AND THAT YOU HAVE THINGS I'M
CURIOUS HOW YOU ARE WHAT YOU
WOULD THINK ABOUT A
POSTPONEMENT TO SORT OUT
POTENTIALLY CREATING A NEW
DEFINITION OF ADDITIONAL
ATTAINABLE HOUSING UNIT.
I WOULD NOT IN MY MIND THAT
WOULD NOT HAVE THE SAME STRINGS
ATTACHED AS ADIEUS.
>> SO YOU WOULD BE FREED FROM
SOME OF THE THOSE THAT WOULD BE
TAILORED, HUH?
>> I BELIEVE THE STAFF WAS
ALREADY CONSIDERING THAT AND
STILL HAD THE CONCERNS ABOUT
THE ENFORCEMENT OF THE
PERMANENT AFFORDABILITY.
SO I'M HEARING THAT HERE AS
WELL AND I THINK THAT SEEMS TO
BE THE ISSUE THAT WE NEED TO
WORK THROUGH.
WE ARE OPEN TO WHATEVER
MECHANISMS ARE NEEDED TO
ENFORCE THAT AFFORDABILITY.
THERE ARE MANY WAYS TO DO THAT.
LIKE I SAID, THERE ARE AT LEAST
THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY FOUR
COMMUNITY LAND TRUSTS ACROSS
THE COUNTRY WHO ARE DOING THIS.
THEY'RE ENFORCING THE
AFFORDABILITY THAT'S HAPPENING
ALL OVER THE WORLD SO WE SHOULD
BE ABLE TO FIND A WAY TO DO
THAT HERE I AM CONCERNED THAT
OPENING UP THE ZONING TO ALLOW
THIS FOR ANY MARKET RATE UNITS
WILL THEN IMMEDIATELY CAUSE OUR
AVAILABLE LAND TO DISAPPEAR.
I KNOW THERE ARE THREE LOCKS
THAT I'VE HAD MY EYE ON FOR A
WHILE AND I KNOW THAT THERE'S
ANOTHER DEVELOPER LOOKING AT
THOSE RIGHT NOW AND A SEVENTEEN
HUNDRED SQUARE FOOT AIDO UNITS
CAN BE BUILT AND SOLD FOR SIX
HUNDRED SEVEN HUNDRED THOUSAND
DOLLARS SO THERE'S PLENTY
OF PROFIT THERE.
I MEAN I WAS SEEKING A COUPLE
OF YEARS OF PROTECTED
OPPORTUNITY FOR THE COMMUNITY
LAND TRUSTS TO TAKE ADVANTAGE
OF SOME OF THE LAND THAT'S
AVAILABLE BEFORE THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN KICKS IN AND
MAKES THE ZONING MUCH MORE
AVAILABLE.
WE NEED LIKE I SAID, WE NEED TO
ESTABLISH OUR TRACK RECORD AND
INCREASE OUR ABILITY TO OBTAIN
COMMERCIAL LENDING SO THAT WE
CAN PRODUCE MORE UNITS.
THANK YOU, SIR.
I'M STILL VERY MUCH IN FAVOR
OF THE PROTECTED YEAH WE'VE
ALREADY STRUCK THAT FROM THE
MOTION SO IT'S NO LONGER UNDER
CONSIDERATION AT THIS POINT.
COMMISSIONER, JUST YOU SEEMED
OTHERWISE I'M JUST A QUESTION
I'M I AM REALLY PUZZLED.
>> I AM REALLY PUZZLED BECAUSE
WE ARE
WE ARE ALL IN SUPPORT
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING BUT WE
ARE TRYING TO ACHIEVE IT
THROUGH THE ZONING CODE ,
THROUGH THE UDC AND I DON'T
THINK THAT WE CAN ACHIEVE IT
THERE.
AND SO I'M TRYING TO BE HONEST
ABOUT WHAT WE'RE DOING, WHICH
IS WE'RE SAYING WE WANT DENSITY
DENSITY NOW IF THAT'S NOT OK
UNIVERSALLY ON EVERY LOT THEN
WE CANNOT VOTE FOR THIS IF WE
THINK IT'S NOT OK UNIVERSALLY
ON EVERY LIGHT BECAUSE THE
WRONG PEOPLE ARE GOING TO BUILD
IT AND SELL IT FOR THE WRONG
PRICE.
WE CANNOT SUPPORT THIS AND WE
CAN'T SUPPORT THE AMENDMENT
THAT WAS BROUGHT TO US BECAUSE
IT'S NOT ENFORCEABLE.
SO I'M SORRY IT'S IT'S VERY CUT
AND DRIED TO ME.
ALL RIGHT.
IT SOUNDS LIKE WE'RE READY TO
VOTE.
CAN YOU READ THE MOTION THAT
WE'RE VOTING ON AGAIN PLANER
THATCHER AND THEN CALL THE RULE
?
YES.
ON THE SECOND PARAGRAPH OF THE
MOTION SECTION FIVE POINT
SIXTEEN POINT SIX POINT D
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT EIGHTY
YOU ADD SUBSECTION SEVEN TO
ALLOW EIGHT TO USE WITH MAXIMUM
GROSS FLOOR AREA OF 1700 SQUARE
FEET BUT IN ANY CASE NOT LARGER
THAN THE TOTAL FLOOR AREA
OF THE PRINCIPAL DWELLING UNIT
READY?
YES.
ALL RIGHT, COMMISSIONER WISCH.
YES COMMISSIONER ABRAM'S NO I'M
SORRY COMMISSIONER.
>> WE KNOW COMMISSIONER DISH NO
COMMISSIONER MILLS' NO
COMMISSIONER WEATHERBEE NO
COMMISSIONER ADAMS YES.
>> COMMISSIONER NORTEN NO, NO.
>> THE MOTION FAILS.
THANK
ALL RIGHT.
WITH OUR AMENDED AGENDA WE ARE
NOW GOING TO TAKE THE PLANNING
COMMISSION BYLAWS AMENDMENT.
HOWEVER, THE NOTE THAT YOU WERE
GIVEN STILL HAS TO ADD NEW
CONTENT IN IT SO YOU MAY HAVE
TO USE THE ONLINE VERSION
UNLESS IT'S JUST IN MY VIEW AND
THAT SHOULD START YOURS IS
GOOD.
OK, GIVE ME JUST A SECOND
BECAUSE THE ONE THAT I HAVE IN
FRONT OF ME OR SO DOES THIS
COME WITH A STEP PLAN OR JUST
AN INTRODUCTION?
>> OK, COULD YOU ARE YOU READY
FOR THE INTRODUCTION.
>> OK, THANK YOU.
I'M SO SORRY WE CAN'T MAKE IT A
MOTION TO POSTPONE THIS TO GET
TO THE PLAN.
CAN WE TALK?
I WOULD LOVE TO KICK THIS LET'S
THIS IS BYELAWS ROOM RIGHT.
YES.
>> THIS IS BYLAWS THAT JUST
DOESN'T FEEL TIME SENSITIVE OR
URGENT AND THE PLAN IS URGENT.
YES.
I'M NOT PAUSING BECAUSE I AM
DISAGREEING.
I'M PAUSING TO FIGURE OUT THE
RIGHT PROCEDURE.
SO I THINK THE RIGHT PROCEDURE
IS SORRY.
>> GO AHEAD MR. IF THE
COMMISSIONER HAS SEEN THE
BYLAWS BEFORE THERE IS ONE
QUESTION THAT WAS RAISED LAST
TIME ABOUT BEING MORE SPECIFIC
ABOUT ADDING A PUBLIC COMMENT
PERIOD TO OUR SITE PLANS THAT
HAS BEEN ADDED TO THE DRAFT
VERSION THAT YOU SEE HERE.
IT MIGHT VERY WELL BE POSSIBLE
TO JUST TAKE ACTION QUITE
QUICKLY AS QUICKLY AS IT WOULD
BE TO POSTPONE UNLESS THERE ARE
OTHER QUESTIONS ABOUT IT.
THE ADDITION WAS I'LL.
>> YOU HAVEN'T PUT ANYTHING ON
THE TABLE SO IT SOUNDS LIKE WE
CAN PROCEED.
SO LET'S GO WITH THE STAFF
INTRODUCTION.
ARE YOU DOING THAT MR. OR IS
THAT PLANNER THATCHER EXISTED?
YOU'LL SEE GREAT DEDICATED
PUBLIC COMMENT OPPORTUNITY WILL
BE PROVIDED FOR ANY SITE PLAN
OR AREA BEING CONSIDERED BY THE
COMMISSION AND THEN YOU'LL SEE
WHAT AN ADDITIONAL CHANGE
PRECEDES THAT AT THE BEGINNING
OF SECTION NINE POINT ONE WHERE
WE ELIMINATED ANNEXATION SO
THAT THOSE IN PROGRESS DIRECTLY
TO CITY COUNCIL CLEARLY AND
ADDED SPECIAL EXCEPTION AS
THOSE DO REQUIRE OUR TYPE COMES
TO THE PLANNING COMMISSION WITH
THAT WITH WITH THOSE CHANGES
YOU'VE ALREADY SEEN THE OTHER
CHANGES ACCOMMODATED THE
STRUCTURE OF ADDING PUBLIC
COMMENT.
BUT THERE WAS A QUESTION
EXPLICITLY ADDED INTO THE
BYLAWS WHICH I'VE DONE.
>> THANK YOU.
SO THE UNIVERSITY PLANNING
COMMISSION HEREBY ADOPT THE
AMENDED PLANNING COMMISSION
BYLAWS SUBJECT TO CITY COUNCIL
REVIEW AND APPROVAL MOVE BY
COMMISSIONER M. SECONDED BY
COMMISSIONER WETHERBEE.
>> WE'RE IN DISCUSSION IS
ANYTHING MISSING AT THE BOTTOM?
PAGE NINE A MAJORITY VOTE
OF THOSE MEMBERS PRESENT WAS
STRUCK AND THEN IT PROCEED RUN
INTO A LIST OF ENUMERATED
STARTING WITH CALL TO ORDER.
I'M LOOKING AT SECTION TEN
POINT THREE.
ARE WE MISSING ANY WORDS
THEY'RE SUBJECT TO IT.
IT'S JUST THAT THE THE MOST THE
ORDER OF BUSINESS CAN BE
ADJUSTED BY THE CHAIR OR OUR
PLANNING MENTIONED THIS WAS
INTENDED TO PROVIDE MORE
FLEXIBILITY WHERE IT DIDN'T
HAVE TO BE A VOTE OF THE
COMMISSION.
CORRECT.
THEN IT SAYS THAT IT'S SUBJECT
TO WHICH DOESN'T LOOK TO BE
STRUCK OUT AND THERE'S NOTHING
AFTER THAT TO MY MISERY THAT WE
CAN STRIKE SUBJECT TO AS WELL.
>> OK, THAT THAT NEEDS TO BE
CUT OTHERWISE.
COMMISSIONER, UH, WE RECEIVED
COMMUNICATION FROM MR. GARBER
ABOUT NINE POINT ONE POINT FOUR
A DEDICATED PUBLIC COMMENT
OPPORTUNITY WILL BE PROVIDED
FOR ANY CYCLONE OR AREA PLAN
CONSIDERED BY THE COMMISSION
WITH A SUGGESTION FOR A LITTLE
MORE SPECIFICITY TO MAKE SURE
THAT PEOPLE HAVE THREE MINUTES
FROM THEIR COMMENTS, ET CETERA.
AND I OFFERED HELPFUL LANGUAGE.
SO AN ADDITIONAL SENTENCE
FOLLOWING THIS ONE WHICH WOULD
SAY THESE DESIGNATED PUBLIC
COMMENT PERIODS SHALL MAINTAIN
THE SAME GUIDANCE FOR
COMMENTING AS PUBLIC HEARINGS
WHICH I WOULD LIKE TO MAKE A
MOTION TO INCLUDE.
>> ALL RIGHT.
UH, IT'S BEEN MOVED IT'S BEEN
SECONDED.
DO WE HAVE A DISCUSSION?
IS THAT NOT COVERED ?
SORRY.
GO AHEAD.
YOU CAN START COMMISSIONER
MILLS, IS THAT NOT COVERED BY
SEVENTEEN OR SEVEN POINT
SEVENTEEN?
AN INDIVIDUAL MAY SPEAK FOR UP
TO THREE MINUTES AT EACH PUBLIC
HEARING OR PUBLIC COMMENT
PERIOD.
>> WE CAN JUST MAKE IT
REFERENTIAL TO THAT IF THAT'S
FRIENDLY TO COMMISSIONER I
THAT'S THAT'S FRIENDLY TO ME AS
LONG AS I SEE BRETT LE NODDING
.
SO ASSUMING THAT YOU'RE
CONFIRMING THAT THAT IS ALREADY
INCLUDED THE GREAT DETAIL
THAT'S OK WITH YOU COMMISSIONER
NORTEN SINCE YOU SECOND PLAINER
BETTER DO YOU HAVE THESE NOTES
OR MR. LEONARD OR WILL YOU JUST
USE THE RECORDING?
>> I DIDN'T CATCH IT OK LOOKS
LIKE BRETZKE ALL RIGHT ERPING
SUBJECT TO IN REFERENCE TO
SEVEN POINT SEVENTEEN AND THE
SITE PLAN SUBACCOUNT GREAT.
>> SO IT'S BEEN UH MOVED IT'S
BEEN SECONDED.
>> UH, DO WE HAVE ANY
DISCUSSION?
WE'LL JUST DO A VOICE VOTE FOR
THIS.
ALL THOSE IN FAVOR SAY AY ANY
OPPOSE THE MOTION CARRIES SO
NOW WITH THE NOTE IT CHANGES.
WE ARE ABLE TO DO A ROLL-CALL
VOTE ON THE EVENT ON THE
CHANGES TO OUR BYLAWS WHEN
YOU'RE READY PLAN AFTER YOUR
WIFE.
YES COMMISSIONER ABRAM'S YES
COMMISSIONER.
YES.
YEP.
COMMISSIONER M. YES.
WETHERBEE YES.
COMMISSIONER ADAMS YES.
YES.
>> MOTION PASSING THE MOTION
PASSES.
ALL RIGHT.
BEFORE WE GET TO THE PLAN,
LET'S TAKE A SHORT FIVE MINUTE
BREAK THAT WILL GIVE STAFF
ENOUGH TIME TO GET SET UP, GET
YOU ALL REFRESHED SO THAT WE
ARE ABLE TO MAKE OUR WAY.
>> WE'LL BE BACK AT TEN TEN
.
SO WE'RE GOING TO RESUME OUR
MEETING NOW.
WE ARE ON ELEVEN A PLANNING NO.
>> NO WE'RE NOT.
WE'RE ON TEN C WHICH IS THE
REVIEW OF THE COMPREHENSIVE
LAND USE DOCUMENTS.
SECOND DRAFT IT SAYS THAT
PRESENTATION BUT PLANNER
BENNETT AND I HAVE DECIDED TO
ASK PLANET PLANNER DENHA TO
SHARE HER SCREEN AND BRING UP
THE EDITS FOR CHAPTER SIX AND
WE WILL START OUR DISCUSSION
THIS EVENING IN CHAPTER SIX WE
ARE PURPOSELY SKIPPING CHAPTER
FIVE FOR NOW SO THAT WE CAN
FINISH CHAPTER SIX AND THEN
WHEN WE CONCLUDE THAT WE'LL SEE
WHAT TIME REMAINS TO HAVE THE
CONVERSATION ABOUT CHAPTER FIVE
IF WE ARE OUT OF TIME TONIGHT
AND THE COMMISSION WANTS TO
ADJOURN EARLY, WE CAN CALL A
REGULAR A SPECIAL MEETING FOR
THE TWENTY SIX OF AUGUST SO
THAT WE CAN CONCLUDE THIS
REVISION AND GET IT TO THE
CONSULTANTS SO THAT WE COULD
GET IT BACK BY THE END
OF SEPTEMBER OR BUY OUR FIRST
REGULAR MEETING IN OCTOBER .
IS EVERYONE OK WITH THIS
APPROACH FOR THIS EVENING?
DOES ANYONE OBJECT?
SO WITH THAT I WILL TURN IT
OVER TO PLANNER BINIT.
WE HAVE A OPEN LIKE
CONVERSATION HERE SO THAT IT IS
EFFICIENT.
I WILL TRY TO INTERRUPT IF
SOMEONE IS TAKING MORE OF THE
TIME PI JUST TO SEE IF WE CAN
MOVE OURSELVES ALONG AND I HOPE
THAT MY INTERRUPTION IS NOT
UNWELCOME.
GREAT WITH THAT PLAN OR VISIT
OK UM SO I'LL TAKE US TO THE
DOCUMENT IN YOUR PACKET THAT
SAYS EDITS COMPILATION
OF COMMISSIONER COMMENTS.
WE STARTED THIS BACK IN JULY.
UM IF YOU RECALL WE WENT
THROUGH CHAPTERS ONE THROUGH
FOUR.
WHAT'S REMAINING IS FIVE AND
SIX IN THE EDITS UNDER
DISCUSSION FOR CHAPTER FIVE.
THOSE ARE PRIMARILY THE FUTURE
LAND USE COMMENTS THAT WE HAVE
BEEN GOING OVER.
WE'VE DECIDED TO JUMP TO
CHAPTER SIX THIS EVENING
BECAUSE WE THINK WE CAN GET
THESE DONE AND THEN IF THERE'S
REMAINING TIME WE CAN GO BACK
TO THE FUTURE LAND USE MAP.
SO SO THIS IS IN YOUR PACKET?
>> I AM ON PAGE SEVEN IF YOU
ALL REMEMBER SUBMITTING THESE
COMMENTS TO US PROBABLY AT THE
END OF JUNE CHAPTER SIX IS THE
IMPLEMENTATION CHAPTER AND SO
THERE SHOULD BE ONLY LET'S SEE
FIVE YEAH FIVE ITEMS HERE TO
DISCUSS ARE WE ALL ON THE SAME
PAGE?
IT'S ALSO SHARING WHAT'S ON THE
SHIRT.
>> IT'S PAGE FIVE IN THE
DOCUMENT THAT WE HAVE TOUCHED
SO I'M SORRY.
THAT'S RIGHT.
I THINK IT WAS JUST
DISORIENTATE BEEN PUSHED DOWN
FOR ME.
>> YEP.
PAGE FIVE FOR YOU.
OK OK UM SO I'M GOING TO JUMP
INTO THIS SOME OF THIS MIGHT
NOT MAKE SENSE RIGHT AWAY
BECAUSE WE HAVEN'T BEEN TO THIS
SECTION YET SO I HAVE THE DRAFT
ALSO PULLED UP AND WE CAN
TOGGLE BETWEEN THE TWO SO THIS
IS REFERRING TO PAGE ONE THIRTY
TWO AND ONE THIRTY THREE AND IT
SAYS HOW DID THESE OBJECTIVES
LINE UP WITH THE LISTED GOALS
AND STRATEGIES IN CHAPTER FOUR
?
SO LET ME SCROLL DOWN A LITTLE
BIT MORE HERE.
IF YOU REMEMBER IN THE ORIGINAL
DRAFT THERE WERE OBJECTIVES AND
THEY WERE LISTED MORE OR LESS
IN THE KIND OF LIKE WHAT WE'VE
HEARD SECTION AND THE DIRECTION
THAT WE GAVE THE CONSULTANT WAS
WE THINK THESE WOULD BE BETTER
OFF AS METRICS THAT ARE
ATTACHED TO OUR GOALS AND
ACTIONS.
>> SO HERE THEY ARE.
THEY'RE STILL LISTED AS
OBJECTIVES BUT YOU CAN SEE NEXT
TO EACH BULLET POINT.
SO FOR EXAMPLE, UM, INCREASED
DIVERSITY OF HOUSING TYPE THE
METRIC WE'RE GOING TO KEEP
TRACK OF HOUSING UNITS PRODUCED
BY TYPE AND IDEALLY ON AN
ANNUAL BASIS WE WOULD BE
REPORTING THAT OUT TO YOU ALL.
SO THESE ARE THE NUMBERS THAT I
WILL BE HELD ACCOUNTABLE TO AS
A FULL TIME STAFF PERSON
CHARGED WITH IMPLEMENTING THIS
.
SO THESE NUMBERS ARE VERY
IMPORTANT FOR MY ROLE AND FOR
US AS A COMMISSION.
SO YES.
>> SO THE QUESTION IS HOW DO
THESE LINE UP WITH THE GOALS
AND STRATEGIES IN CHAPTER FOUR?
>> SO I SUPPOSE WE COULD DO IS
MAYBE TO MAKE IT CLEARER ATTACH
WHICH GOAL LIKE WE COULD WRITE
IN THIS BULLET POINT WHAT GOAL
WE THINK THAT IT'S ADDRESSING.
>> WOULD THAT BE A CLEAR EDIT?
THIS WASN'T MY COMMENT BUT I
ACCEPT YOUR RECOMMENDATION
THERE.
OK, NO OTHER THOUGHTS,
COMMISSIONER ABRAMS HAS
SOMETHING IN MY BRAIN IS MY
GOING WAY BACK I THINK THIS WAS
ME.
YEAH.
AND I THINK MAYBE IT WAS JUST
MAYBE WHAT I WAS SECRETLY
HOPING WAS THAT WE COULD JUST
CALL THESE GOALS OR THAT
THERE'S SOMETHING CONFUSING FOR
ME ABOUT HAVING GOALS AND
OBJECTIVES THAT ARE DIFFERENT.
SO BUT I THINK WHAT YOU'RE
SUGGESTING IS THAT WE WILL THEN
LINK THESE TO GOALS.
I THINK THAT WE CAN REMOVE THE
WORD OBJECTIVES BECAUSE THESE
ARE AS I CAN SEE THEM THESE ARE
THE METRICS, RIGHT?
THESE ARE THE NUMBER THE
TANGIBLE THINGS THAT I CAN
COUNT AND MEASURE OVER TIME TO
SEE OUR PROGRESS TOWARDS OUR
GOALS.
SO I THINK THAT WE COULD GO
THAT WITH THAT RATE AND THEN
THE PAGE TITLE WOULD BE JUST
METRICS NOT MEETINGS AND
OBJECTIVES AND FULL
TRANSPARENCY.
WHEN THIS DRAFT CAME OUT I
DON'T THINK I THINK WE HAD
DECIDED TO WAIT ON THE
IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX SO I
FORMATTED THIS AT THE LAST
MINUTE TO JUST THROW ALL THESE
ON ONE PAGE.
BUT I THINK IN THE
IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX THAT
THESE COULD BE THESE BULLET
POINTS COULD BE EITHER NEXT TO
THE SPECIFIC STRATEGY OR HERE
WE COULD SAY MORE BROADLY WHAT
GOAL WE THINK THAT IT'S
ATTACHED TO TO MAKE THAT CLEAR
CONNECTION.
>> THANKS.
CAN I JUST ASK A GENERAL
QUESTION?
YEAH.
ON THIS PAGE IT WASN'T CLEAR TO
ME HOW IS THIS LIST
OF OBJECTIVES OR METRICS OR
WHATEVER YOU'RE CALLING THEM?
WE'RE EXACTLY THEY CAME FROM
AND HOW THEY RELATE TO WHAT'S
BELOW IN TABLE IN THE TABLE.
>> SO THESE CAME FROM THE
ORIGINAL DRAFT.
THESE WERE IN HERE AND THEN WE
SAID WELL HOW ARE WE GOING TO
KNOW IF WE ARE ACHIEVING THESE?
AND SO THE METRICS HERE WERE
ADDED FOR THE SECOND DRAFT.
>> SO I'M ASKING REALLY ALMOST
MORE OF A BASIC FORMAT IN
QUESTION LIKE WHAT'S THE
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THIS LIST
HERE AND THE STUFF THAT'S IN
THE TABLE BELOW?
IT IS JUST FORMATTED A
DIFFERENT WAY.
>> SO THE TABLE BELOW ARE THE
SPECIFIC ACTIONS THAT WE WANT
TO TAKE.
RIGHT.
THIS IS OUR IMPLEMENT.
THESE ARE OUR SPECIFIC ACTIONS.
SO THEN THE METRICS ARE GOING
TO BE EITHER FOLDED INTO THIS
TABLE THAT WOULD SAY HOW ARE
YOU HOW DO YOU KNOW THAT THIS
ACTION IS GETTING YOU WHERE YOU
WANT TO GO?
>> WHAT I'M GOING TO KEEP TRACK
OF THESE METRICS TO SEE OVER
TIME JUST A LITTLE BIT OF TEXT
EXPLAINING THAT OK, YEAH, I'M
JUST ASKING FOR CLARITY FOR
SOMEONE READING THIS IS LIKE
WHAT IS THIS AND HOW DOES IT
ALL PIECED TOGETHER?
SO JUST A SENTENCE OR TWO THAT
FRAMES WHAT YOU'RE PRESENTING
HERE AND HOW IT RELATES TO THE
TABLE BELOW AND JUST CLARIFIES
THESE METRICS ARE ALL DERIVED
FROM THE DISCUSSION THAT WAS
PRESENTED.
>> OK, REALLY BASIC.
>> I'M JUST THINKING ABOUT
READABILITY FOR SOMEONE WHO'S
PICKING IT UP.
>> YES, I DO THINK CHAPTER SIX
NEEDS A LITTLE WORK IN THAT
BECAUSE I DON'T KNOW IF WE'VE
HAD AS LARGE A DISCUSSION ABOUT
THAT THAT CHAPTER AS A
COMMISSION.
>> I GUESS MAYBE THIS IS A
SILLY QUESTION BUT DO
ADJECTIVES COME AFTER THE GOALS
LIKE HERE IS GOAL AND HERE ARE
THE OBJECTIVES ASSOCIATED WITH
IT OR IS THE OBJECTIVE BIGGER
THAN THE GOAL?
DOES THAT MAKE IN ORDER TO DO
THAT MAPPING LIKE I GUESS I'M
TRYING TO UNDERSTAND WHICH IS
THE HIGHER LEVEL THING.
SO LET ME LET ME GO BACK TO THE
PLAN BECAUSE I I KNOW NOT
EVERYONE LOVED THIS GRAPHIC BUT
I DO BELIEVE THAT WE TRIED TO
EXPLAIN THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN ALL OF THESE SO I'M
GOING TO HAVE TO TRY TO FIND
WHAT PAGE THIS IS ON.
>> BUT GENERALLY IT GOES YOU
KNOW, GOALS ARE THE BROADEST
AND THEN LIKE A FUNNEL YOU GO
DOWN TO YOUR ACTION IS YOUR
MOST SPECIFIC THING.
THE ACTIONS ARE WHAT ARE LISTED
IN THE IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX.
RIGHT.
AND SO LET ME TRY TO FIND THIS
HERE SO OUR GOALS AND
OBJECTIVES DIFFERENT OVERALL
OBJECTIVES ARE METRICS.
YEAH, I THINK WE'RE GOING TO
TAKE ACTION OBJECTIVE AT ALL
RIGHT.
CORRECT.
WE'LL HAVE GOALS, GOALS AND
STRATEGIES AND THEN METRICS FOR
METRICS FOR MEASURING THE
SUCCESS OF THE IMPLEMENTATION
OR MEETING THE GOALS.
SO LET'S TAKE A LOOK AT THIS
PAGE.
MAYBE WE CAN GIVE SOME FEEDBACK
BUT THE WAY IT'S ENVISIONED NOW
IS OUR VISION IS OUR BRAUDIS
LIKE OUR VISION STATEMENT ANN
ARBOR FOR ALL THESE ARE OUR
CORE VALUES.
THOSE FOUR THAT ARE LISTED
THERE THEN WE HAVE OUR GOALS
AND STRATEGIES SO
THE WAY THAT
I SEE THIS AS GOALS ARE BROADER
STRATEGIES ARE YOUR ACTIONS TO
ACHIEVE YOUR GOALS AND THEN
IDEALLY THOSE ARE CAN SPACIALLY
THROUGH YOUR FEATURE AND LAND
USE MAP AND THEN ALSO IN YOUR
IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX.
RIGHT.
YOU CAN'T EXPRESS EVERYTHING
SPATIALLY.
YOU DO NEED TEXT TO EXPLAIN
WHAT YOUR ACTIONS ARE AND HOW
YOU'RE GOING TO MEASURE THEM SO
THIS IS THEIR GRAPHIC THAT THEY
DEVELOPED TO TRY TO EXPLAIN
THAT RELATIONSHIP.
>> BUT WE CAN AND WE CAN ALSO
ADD TEXT DOES THAT MAKE MORE
SENSE OR IS THAT MORE CONFUSING
?
>> YOU ARE RESPONDING TO WHO
COMES FROM ELSEWHERE.
>> FIRST IT WAS COMMISSIONER
NORTEN WHO ASKED FOR SOME TAX
AND THEN YES I THOUGHT
COMMISSIONER MILLS HAD A FOLLOW
UP.
SO IT'S BETWEEN THOSE TWO.
SO THERE IS TEXT HERE
EXPLAINING LIKE THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN VISION AND GOALS AND
STRATEGIES IMPLEMENTATION
FUTURE LAND USE MAP BUT I GUESS
TO ADDRESS COMMISSIONER
NORTON'S REQUEST THAT MAYBE
ABOVE THE IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
OR THE METRICS ARE WE CAN
ADJUST TO CHAPTER SIX
OF SPLAYING ABOUT HOW THIS IS
DOING.
SO I DO HAVE A SUBSTANTIVE
QUESTION ABOUT THE HOUSING
POLICY OBJECTIVES ON PAGE 132
OK WAS COMMISSIONER SO DID DID
WE ANSWER HERE?
I THINK BY TAKING OUT
OBJECTIVES AND JUST TALKING
ABOUT IT AS METRICS AND ALSO
WHAT I'M HEARING IS THAT THERE
MAY NOT BE A ONE TO ONE RATIO
BETWEEN DARRELL THE I THINK
BETWEEN GOAL AND METRICS IS
COOL WHAT KIND OF MAPPING THEM
TO SEE LIKE DO WE HAVE METRICS
THAT ARE METRICS GENERALLY
COMING OUT OF THAT GOAL OR
RELATED TO THAT GOAL?
RIGHT.
AND THERE'S DEFINITELY NOT
MULTIPLE STRATEGIES MIGHT BE
MEASURED BY THE SAME METRIC.
RIGHT.
LIKE THE CONTRIBUTE TO THAT
SAME METRIC.
THAT'S HOW I SEE IT.
OK, SUPER.
AND THAT'S IT WAS JUST THAT MAP
IN MY HEAD THAT I WAS TRYING TO
GET AT AND SO SOMETIMES THERE
MIGHT BE MULTIPLE METRICS
ASSOCIATED WITH A SINGLE GOAL
AND SO I THINK GREAT DROP IN
THE OBJECTIVELY WHICH I THINK
WILL CLARIFY IT.
UM, I HEAR THAT YOU HAVE
ANOTHER QUESTION BUT I'M
WONDERING IF WE CAN STICK TO
WHAT'S ALREADY BEEN SUBMITTED.
IT'S HERE FOR US TO GET THROUGH
OR IF WE WANT WE CAN WE CAN
FINISH THAT AND THEN COME BACK
TO COMMISSIONER NORTON.
>> OK, SO IN THE SAME VEIN ON
THE SAME PAGE ONE OF THE
COMMISSIONERS HAD ASKED LIKE
WOULD THIS BE A GOOD METRIC TO
ADD WHICH IS WHAT A GOOD METRIC
FOR DISPLACEMENT OF LOCALLY
OWNED BUSINESSES B CATEGORIZING
BUSINESSES BY SIZE AND
OWNERSHIP TO CATCH IF THE CITY
IS LOSING THOSE.
SO I WOULD SAY IN THEORY THAT'S
A FANTASTIC METRIC I WOULD HAVE
TO ASK PERHAPS JOE GIANT OR
SOMEONE ELSE ON THE PLANNING
TEAM LIKE HOW FEASIBLE IT IS OR
WHAT DATA SOURCE IS AVAILABLE
FOR US TO USE SO I GUESS MY NET
WOULD BE TO CHECK FOR A DATA
SOURCE BUT IN GENERAL I WOULD
SUPPORT THAT.
YEAH, I THINK MY QUESTION IS
HOW HOW ARE WE DEFINING
DISPLACEMENT BECAUSE LIKE SOME
PEOPLE RETIRE AND THE BUSINESS
GOES AWAY.
ARE WE TALKING DISPLACEMENT BY
DEVELOPMENT?
ARE WE LIKE HOW ARE WE SO IF
EVERYONE HAS A STANDARD
UNDERSTANDING OF DISPLACEMENT
THAT'S HERE THEN MY POINT IS
MOOT.
BUT IF NOT THEN I NEED TO
UNDERSTAND WHAT WE MEAN BY
DISPLACEMENT.
YEAH, THAT'S A GOOD POINT
BECAUSE SOME PEOPLE WILL CHOOSE
TO CLOSE THEIR BUSINESS.
YEAH.
AND IT WAS A VERY SUCCESSFUL
BUSINESS AND THEY'RE LIKE I
RETIRED IT WELL ACTUALLY THIS
IS ANGELOS LIKE ANGELAS WAS A
VERY SUCCESSFUL BUSINESS BUT
THE KIDS DIDN'T WANT TO RUN IT
OR WHOEVER WAS NEXT IN LINE WAS
LIKE I'M GOOD.
AND THEN THE OFFER FROM THE
CAME AND SO THEN THEY CLOSED.
>> RIGHT.
SO DISPLACEMENT IS IN OUR
GLOSSARY TERMS IT IS.
>> BUT I DO THINK THAT IT'S
PRETTY SPECIFIC TO HOUSING AND
NEIGHBORHOODS.
YES.
AND NOT FOR BUSINESSES.
SO HOW WOULD YOU CATEGORIZE
ANGELOS BECAUSE PEOPLE WOULD
SAY IS THAT A RESULT?
WHY DID TC JUAN CARLOS ANGELOS
SO THAT WAS JUST SAYING LIKE IF
WE CAN INCLUDE IT IN THEIR IN
THE GLOSSER OR IF THE OF THE
DISPLACEMENT IN THE GLOSSARIES
MEANT ONLY TO REFER TO HOUSING
LET'S SAY THAT AND THEN MAYBE
HAVE A DIFFERENT ONE THAT'S
ABOUT COMMERCIAL OR SOMETHING
OR MAYBE CHOOSE A DIFFERENT
WORD OR USE A DIFFERENT WORD.
THANK YOU.
SO JUST LIKE IT'S JUST DECLINE
IN NUMBERS RATHER THAN JUST
BECAUSE DISPLACEMENT MAY BE
VERY DIFFICULT TO WITHOUT
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE
INTERVIEWS.
RIGHT EXACTLY.
YEAH I ACCEPT COMMISSIONER
DISCUSS CLARIFICATION AND THEN
I HAVE NO PROBLEM WITH IT OK SO
I DON'T NEED I DON'T NEED TO
WRITE HERE IN MY NOTES HOW ARE
WE DEFINING DISPLACEMENT.
I CAN JUST SAY CHANGE THIS TO A
DECLINE IN BUSINESS TYPES ARE
YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT BUSINESS
TYPES AND SIZES SORT OF WHAT'S
IN YES.
YEAH WELL IT'S LOCALLY OWNED
BUSINESSES CATEGORIZED BY THOSE
TWO CRITERIA.
>> YEAH.
SO WE WANT TO TRACK LOSS
OF LOCAL OWNERSHIP NOW I'M
GOING BACK I JUST SEARCHED FOR
IS NOT IN THE PLAN ANYWHERE
ELSE THAT FEELS LIKE AN ODD
METRIC TO I THINK IT'S
SOMETHING THAT'S AWESOME BUT I
DON'T THINK THAT LOCALLY OWNED
BUSINESSES APPEARS ANYWHERE
ELSE IN THE PLAN AND SO THAT'S
BUDE METRIC.
THERE'S I THINK SOME OF OUR
GOALS ARE GEARED TOWARDS LOCAL
ENTREPRENEURS IS OK AND IT'S
ESPECIALLY IN THE ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT I MEAN I CAN SEE
YOUR CONCERN THAT IS PRESENT
THERE ESPECIALLY AS LOCAL
BUSINESSES ARE TRANSITIONING AS
THE CITY IS TRANSITIONING.
SO IF WE ARE TRACKING THAT SO
THAT SCHOOL SEVEN SUPPORT
ENTREPRENEURS ACROSS DIFFERENT
INDUSTRIES INDUSTRIES.
YEAH.
ALL RIGHT.
OK.
>> AND THE ONLY OTHER THERE'S A
SMALL AND TAKE IT IN THE SPIRIT
THAT IT'S OFFERED IN AND YOU
CAN IGNORE WHICH IS I WOULD
WANT AN EXPANSIVE DEFINITION
OF LOCAL BECAUSE IF THERE IS
SOMEONE WHO LIVES IN THE CITY
BUT RUNS A FRANCHISE I SEE THEM
AS A LOCAL BUSINESS OWNER.
I WOULD NOT SAY THEY ARE PART
OF A CORPORATE OVERLORD SYSTEM
AND SHOULD BE IGNORED BECAUSE
THEY ARE RUNNING A FRANCHISE.
>> OK, IT'S PROBABLY OK TO WORK
THOSE DETAILS OUT NOT IN THE
PLAN I WOULD LOVE FOR IT NOT TO
BE WORKED OUT THERE BUT IN
GIVING GUIDANCE EXPANSIVE.
OK UM SO THE NEXT THREE ARE
SPECIFIC TO THE IMPLEMENTATION
MATRIX.
SOME NOW MIGHT BE A GOOD TIME
TO GO BACK TO COMMISSIONER
NORTONS QUESTION ABOUT I THINK
IT WAS ABOUT METRICS OR HOUSING
POLICY.
>> YEAH IT'S A QUESTION FOR
REALLY THE COMMISSION AS I
RECALL OVER OUR DISCUSSIONS
WE'VE RECOGNIZED A DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN INCOME CONSTRAINED
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND MIDDLE
OR MISSING AND SO NOW WE HAVE A
POLICY TO INCREASE INCOME
ELIGIBLE FOR HOUSING BUT WE
DON'T ALSO HAVE A POLICY TO
INCREASE MIDDLE INCOME.
I DON'T REMEMBER WHAT TERM IT
CAME IN ON.
SO I'M WONDERING IF WE SHOULD
ADD A AND WHAT ABOUT THE SECOND
BULLET POINT INCREASE DIVERSITY
OF HOUSING TYPES?
WELL, SO THERE'S DIVERSITY
OF TYPES AND THEN THERE'S NO SO
WE HAVE DIVERSITY OF TYPES
WHICH KIND OF COVERS EVERYTHING
AND THEN WE HAVE A NUMBER
OF INCOME ELIGIBLE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING UNITS.
SO THE QUESTION I WAS HAVING
SHOULD WE ALSO INCREASE THE
NUMBER OF WHAT WAS THE TERM WE
CAME WITH MISSING MIDDLE
OF YEAH.
>> WHY DON'T WE JUST ADD THAT
SO INCREASE DIVERSITY
OF HOUSING TYPES COMMA
INCLUDING MISSING MIDDLE OR
SOMETHING LIKE THAT?
>> WELL SO I THINK THE
DIVERSITY IS ONE THING SO WE'VE
GOT LOTS OF DIFFERENT KINDS.
I COULD JUST SEE INCOME
ELIGIBLE UNITS THEN WE SHOULD
ANOTHER POLICY INCREASE MISSING
RENTAL UNITS.
>> OK THAT'S THE ALSO ADD
INCREASE MISSING MIDDLE HOUSING
TYPE UNITS.
>> IT'S A LITTLE MUSHY MISS.
YEAH OK.
>> AND YOU MEAN SPECIFICALLY
JUST INCREASE THE NUMBER
OF ISN'T THAT HOW THE POPULAR
VOTE IS READING?
WE WANT TO INCREASE THE NUMBER
OF INCOME ELIGIBLE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
>> YEAH YEAH.
OTHERWISE YOU COULD HAVE LIKE
ONE COMPLEX THAT WOULD SAY YEAH
WE HAVE AN INCREASE IN
DIVERSITY BUT RIGHT.
IT'S HARD TO TALK ABOUT
DIVERSITY AND SO I'M JUST
TRYING TO MAKE SURE WE'RE
COVERING ALL OF THE MISSING
HOUSING.
OK, I HAVE THAT NOTED OK OK SO
NEXT ARE WE OK TO MOVE ON TO
THE THE ACTUAL MATRIX NOW SO IF
I SCROLL DOWN HERE AND WE GO TO
GOAL ONE LET ME SEE WHAT THE
EXACT EDIT IS CALLING OUT
MAXIMUM SQUARE FOOTAGE OR
LIMITING THE FOOTPRINT OF ANY
BUILDING IN LOW RISE DISTRICTS
MAY GO A LONG WAY IN INCREASING
COMFORT IF THAT GRAPHIC IS
REPRODUCIBLE THAT MIGHT EVEN BE
SOMETHING TO INCLUDE.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT GRAPHIC
THEY'RE REFERRING TO IN THE
MATRIX.
DOES ANYONE RECALL SUBMITTAL
NICKELSON IN THE BOX?
>> SO THAT WAS MY COMMENT.
IT WAS RIGHT BEFORE I WENT ON
VACATION BUT I DON'T THINK IT
WAS SPECIFIC TO THE
IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX I WAS
GOING TO SAY AND IT WAS IN IT
WAS IT WAS THE BLOG EFFECTIVELY
THAT I FORWARDED FROM
KILPATRICK KILPATRICK EXACTLY.
>> AND SO THAT WAS MY OVERALL
BUT I THINK THAT'S BEEN
ADDRESSED ACTUALLY IT'S BEEN
ADDRESSED IN SOME WAYS THROUGH
COUNCIL RESOLUTION.
SO I THINK IT CAN BE STRUCK
HERE.
IT WASN'T INTENDED TO BE AN
IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX.
IT WOULD HAVE LEARNED MORE
ABOUT THE STRATEGIES.
OK, DO YOU WANT TO GO BACK TO
THE STRATEGIES?
NO, BECAUSE I THINK AT THAT
TIME THERE WASN'T THIS IDEA
OF MAXIMUM SQUARE FOOTAGE OR
LIMITING THE FOOTPRINT OF ANY
BUILDING WHICH I THINK NOW THE
LANGUAGE CAME FROM COUNCIL TO
US INCLUDES SOME OF THAT.
>> SO I THINK I THINK IT'S MOOT
AT THIS POINT.
OK, DO YOU ALL AGREE ON THAT?
I MEAN I DIDN'T SOUND SPECIFIC
TO SQUARE FOOTAGE, NOT UNIT BUT
IF YOU ALL WANT TO FIGURE OUT
HOW TO STRIKE THIS BUT I THINK
IT'S SOME COMMUNICATION MAYBE
AGAIN I SENT IT RIGHT BEFORE I
WENT ON VACATION SO I DON'T
KNOW IF IT WAS INCLUDED BUT IT
WAS A IT WAS A GOOD GRAPHIC IF
YOU HAVEN'T SEEN IT.
THANK YOU.
>> OK, SO THESE ARE MORE
SPECIFIC THEN SO IMPLEMENTATION
MATRIX ONE POINT TO CHANGE INFO
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT TO NEAR
TERM AS THAT ARE CONCERNED
SHOULD NOT NEEDED HOUSING.
SO LET'S GO TO ONE POINT TO SO
ONE POINT TO HERE THIS IS HARD
TO SEE ON THE SCREEN.
LET ME TRY TO MAKE THIS BIGGER
BUT ONE POINT TO HERE IS TO
DIVERSIFY THE TYPES OF HOUSING
THROUGH MISSING MIDDLE HOUSING
STRATEGY AND UNIVERSAL DESIGN.
SO THESE SAFEWORD FOR SIX YEARS
I'M WONDERING IF THEY MEANT ALL
THREE OF THESE UNDER HERE WOULD
LIKE TO BE MOVED TO ONE TO
THREE YEARS.
>> YES, DO WE WANT TO VOTE ON
THAT OR DISCUSS WE CAN I DIDN'T
UNDERSTAND THE REFERENCE TO
ESTHETIC CONCERNS BECAUSE
THAT'S NOT IT'S THE UNIVERSAL
DESIGN BUT THAT'S NOT ESTHETIC
UNIVERSAL DESIGN IS ABOUT LIKE
ACCESSIBILITY.
THAT'S BECAUSE YOU'RE AN
ARCHITECT.
YEAH.
SO I SUPPOSE IT'S BOTH.
YEAH IT IS ACCESSIBILITY BUT
IT'S NOT DESIGN IN TERMS
OF BEAUTY.
>> IT'S DESIGN IN TERMS TO BE
MORE ACCESSIBLE.
IT'S WHY IT FEELS LIKE
SOMETHING I SAID SO I'M HAPPY
TO TAKE TAKE THE PENALTY ON
THIS AND THERE'S NO PENALTY.
IT'S OKAY MY TO ACCELERATE MY
GOAL.
>> THANK YOU COMMISSIONER.
>> MY GOAL IS TO ACCELERATE AND
TO TAKE IT DOWN MAKES SENSE.
YES WE CAN PUT ONE YOU WANT TO
PUT ONE TO THREE YEARS FOR ALL
THREE OF THESE.
YES.
ACTIONS LISTED UNDER ONE POINT
AND SOUNDS LIKE THERE'S NO
YES.
OBJECTIONS.
AND SOUNDS LIKE THERE'S NO
OK AND I KNOW THE NEXT ONE IS
OBJECTIONS.
MINE.
OK AND I KNOW THE NEXT ONE IS
THIS PERPETUATES DEPENDANCE
MINE.
STRIKE.
THIS PERPETUATES DEPENDANCE
>> OK SO IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
STRIKE.
SIX POINT TWO SO THAT'S GOING
>> OK SO IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
TO BE UNDER OUR ECONOMY AND
SIX POINT TWO SO THAT'S GOING
OPPORTUNITY SECTIONS PROMOTION
TO BE UNDER OUR ECONOMY AND
OF INCREMENTAL SHOPPING CENTER
OPPORTUNITY SECTIONS PROMOTION
REDEVELOPMENT SO LET'S GO DOWN
OF INCREMENTAL SHOPPING CENTER
TO SIX POINT TWO.
REDEVELOPMENT SO LET'S GO DOWN
>> YES AND I GOT ARGUED WITH
TO SIX POINT TWO.
ABOUT THIS BUT GENERALLY MY
>> YES AND I GOT ARGUED WITH
OBJECTION HERE IS BY HOLDING IT
ABOUT THIS BUT GENERALLY MY
IN THE WAY THAT IT IS WE ARE
OBJECTION HERE IS BY HOLDING IT
PERPETUATING A CAR DEPENDENCY.
IN THE WAY THAT IT IS WE ARE
>> SO CAN YOU SHOW ME EXACTLY
PERPETUATING A CAR DEPENDENCY.
WHERE YOU'RE SEEING THE WORD
>> SO CAN YOU SHOW ME EXACTLY
INCREMENTAL OR YOU'RE JUST
WHERE YOU'RE SEEING THE WORD
SAYING IT IMPLIES THAT OH, IS
INCREMENTAL OR YOU'RE JUST
IT SIX POINT THREE INSTEAD?
SAYING IT IMPLIES THAT OH, IS
>> YES.
IT SIX POINT THREE INSTEAD?
OH, BECAUSE IT SAYS OVER TIME
>> YES.
SIX POINT THREE NO.
OH, BECAUSE IT SAYS OVER TIME
THE WORDS ARE RETRO FITTING CAR
SIX POINT THREE NO.
ORIENTED SHOPPING CENTERS LIKE
THE WORDS ARE RETRO FITTING CAR
IOWA TO INCREASE THEIR MIX
ORIENTED SHOPPING CENTERS LIKE
OF USE AND WALKABILITY OVER
IOWA TO INCREASE THEIR MIX
TIME.
OF USE AND WALKABILITY OVER
SO WANTING TO DO SO BECAUSE
TIME.
THEY ARE IN UNIQUE OWNERSHIP
SO WANTING TO DO SO BECAUSE
STRUCTURES, IT CAN DELAY THE
THEY ARE IN UNIQUE OWNERSHIP
READING ELEMENT OF THAT.
STRUCTURES, IT CAN DELAY THE
>> SO WHEN WE WERE DOING TICK
READING ELEMENT OF THAT.
ONE ONE OF THE VERY FIRST
>> SO WHEN WE WERE DOING TICK
QUESTIONS I ASKED PLANNER
ONE ONE OF THE VERY FIRST
DUILIO WAS WHY DIDN'T WE
QUESTIONS I ASKED PLANNER
INCLUDE BRIARWOOD AND TO TAKE
DUILIO WAS WHY DIDN'T WE
ONE AND SHE RESPONDED BECAUSE
INCLUDE BRIARWOOD AND TO TAKE
IT'S NOT A SINGLE ENTITY.
ONE AND SHE RESPONDED BECAUSE
IT'S EVERY ONE OF THOSE.
IT'S NOT A SINGLE ENTITY.
>> IT'S LIKE A CONDO INSIDE THE
IT'S EVERY ONE OF THOSE.
MALL.
>> IT'S LIKE A CONDO INSIDE THE
SO LIKE SEARS OWNED ITS
MALL.
BUILDING AND ITS PARKING LOT
SO LIKE SEARS OWNED ITS
J.C. PENNEY ITS BUILDING AND
BUILDING AND ITS PARKING LOT
ITS PARKING LOT SO IF IF THE MY
J.C. PENNEY ITS BUILDING AND
GOAL IS TO NOT LIKE WAIT IF
ITS PARKING LOT SO IF IF THE MY
THERE'S A WAY FOR US TO
GOAL IS TO NOT LIKE WAIT IF
COMMUNICATE THAT WE WANT TO
THERE'S A WAY FOR US TO
ACCELERATE THE REDESIGNING
COMMUNICATE THAT WE WANT TO
OF THESE AND I THINK THE
ACCELERATE THE REDESIGNING
RETROFITTING CAN STILL PRESERVE
OF THESE AND I THINK THE
THE CARSON TRAGEDY.
RETROFITTING CAN STILL PRESERVE
>> SO THAT'S JUST HOW LIME'S
THE CARSON TRAGEDY.
LANGUAGE NOT AT THIS STAGE IT'S
>> SO THAT'S JUST HOW LIME'S
A BIG MISTAKE BUT OK, SO I CAN
LANGUAGE NOT AT THIS STAGE IT'S
JUST MAKE NOTE THEN IF YOU
A BIG MISTAKE BUT OK, SO I CAN
TRUST STAFF TO DO THIS TOO.
JUST MAKE NOTE THEN IF YOU
>> BOY, THAT'S A LOADED
TRUST STAFF TO DO THIS TOO.
SENTENCE.
>> BOY, THAT'S A LOADED
OK, SO SARA SARA HAS SOMETHING
SENTENCE.
TO SAY.
OK, SO SARA SARA HAS SOMETHING
>> COMMISSIONER MILLS, I GUESS
TO SAY.
WHAT IS IN BOLD DIRECTLY UNDER
>> COMMISSIONER MILLS, I GUESS
SIX POINT THREE UNLESS THIS
WHAT IS IN BOLD DIRECTLY UNDER
CHANGED THIS IS THE STRATEGY
SIX POINT THREE UNLESS THIS
THAT IS UP IN CHAPTER THIS IS
CHANGED THIS IS THE STRATEGY
THE YEAH.
THAT IS UP IN CHAPTER THIS IS
THAT DIRECT LANGUAGE FROM THE
THE YEAH.
STRATEGY AND I DIDN'T LIKE IT
THAT DIRECT LANGUAGE FROM THE
THERE.
STRATEGY AND I DIDN'T LIKE IT
>> OH WELL YES.
THERE.
AND IF THAT DIDN'T GET CHANGED
>> OH WELL YES.
THOUGH PREVIOUSLY WE THIS IS
AND IF THAT DIDN'T GET CHANGED
JUST COPYING EACH OF THOSE
THOUGH PREVIOUSLY WE THIS IS
STRATEGIES AND THEN TALKING
JUST COPYING EACH OF THOSE
ABOUT THINGS.
STRATEGIES AND THEN TALKING
SO I GUESS MY QUESTION THAT I
ABOUT THINGS.
HAVE IS IS IT ABOUT A STRATEGY
SO I GUESS MY QUESTION THAT I
OR IS IT ABOUT THE
HAVE IS IS IT ABOUT A STRATEGY
IMPLEMENTATION AND AND THEN WE
OR IS IT ABOUT THE
WOULD NEED TO GO BACK BECAUSE I
IMPLEMENTATION AND AND THEN WE
I THINK THAT THAT'S A WORTHY
WOULD NEED TO GO BACK BECAUSE I
CONSIDERATION TO HAVE.
I THINK THAT THAT'S A WORTHY
BUT IF WE IF WE DIDN'T CHANGE
CONSIDERATION TO HAVE.
THE LANGUAGE OF SIX POINT THREE
BUT IF WE IF WE DIDN'T CHANGE
IN THE CHAPTER ABOVE, THEN WE
THE LANGUAGE OF SIX POINT THREE
NEED TO RETHINK THAT.
IN THE CHAPTER ABOVE, THEN WE
I MEAN I SEE YOUR POINT AT THIS
NEED TO RETHINK THAT.
POINT WHICH IS IF THIS IS COPY
I MEAN I SEE YOUR POINT AT THIS
TO WHICH MAIN STAFF REJECT THE
POINT WHICH IS IF THIS IS COPY
COMMENT THAT I GAVE EARLIER
TO WHICH MAIN STAFF REJECT THE
HERE AND THIS IS HOW ENDED UP I
COMMENT THAT I GAVE EARLIER
CAN THINK ABOUT A PROPOSED
HERE AND THIS IS HOW ENDED UP I
LANGUAGE AND SEND THAT ALONG
CAN THINK ABOUT A PROPOSED
AND YOU CAN BRING IT BACK TO US
LANGUAGE AND SEND THAT ALONG
IF YOU FEEL LIKE IT REQUIRES
AND YOU CAN BRING IT BACK TO US
THE WHOLE COMMISSION.
IF YOU FEEL LIKE IT REQUIRES
>> WELL, I GUESS DOES THE
THE WHOLE COMMISSION.
COMMISSION IF THE COMMISSION
>> WELL, I GUESS DOES THE
SUPPORTS THAT THEN CHAIR WHICH
COMMISSION IF THE COMMISSION
CAN SEND US IF YOU AGREE WITH
SUPPORTS THAT THEN CHAIR WHICH
THE CONCEPT THAT THIS NEEDS TO
CAN SEND US IF YOU AGREE WITH
BE CHANGED, THEN CHAIRMAN WIJK
THE CONCEPT THAT THIS NEEDS TO
AND SEND US THAT LANGUAGE AND
BE CHANGED, THEN CHAIRMAN WIJK
IT CAN BE INCORPORATED INTO THE
AND SEND US THAT LANGUAGE AND
THIRD DRAFT.
IT CAN BE INCORPORATED INTO THE
>> YES.
THIRD DRAFT.
GO FOR THE IDEA OF PROMOTING AS
>> YES.
EXPEDITIOUSLY AS POSSIBLE THE
GO FOR THE IDEA OF PROMOTING AS
REDEVELOPMENT OF THE SHOPPING
EXPEDITIOUSLY AS POSSIBLE THE
MALLS TO TO TURN THEM INTO
REDEVELOPMENT OF THE SHOPPING
WALKABLE, LIVABLE PLACES LIKE
MALLS TO TO TURN THEM INTO
JUST USING THE WORD RETROFIT
WALKABLE, LIVABLE PLACES LIKE
LIKE THE HANGUP IS ON THE WORD
JUST USING THE WORD RETROFIT
RETROFITTING THAT AND OVER TIME
LIKE THE HANGUP IS ON THE WORD
AND OVER TIME SO SO WE CAN
RETROFITTING THAT AND OVER TIME
CHANGE THE LANGUAGE RIGHT NOW
AND OVER TIME SO SO WE CAN
AND CAN REDEVELOP DEVELOP OK SO
CHANGE THE LANGUAGE RIGHT NOW
CHANGE RETROFITS JUST YOU'RE
AND CAN REDEVELOP DEVELOP OK SO
KIND OF LEAVING THE BASIC
CHANGE RETROFITS JUST YOU'RE
FRAMEWORK EXACTLY.
KIND OF LEAVING THE BASIC
>> DENHA ON IT AND WHICH IS HOW
FRAMEWORK EXACTLY.
WE GOT TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY
>> DENHA ON IT AND WHICH IS HOW
THOUSAND PARKING SPOTS AT THE
WE GOT TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY
IRS WAS IT CALLED NOW AND THEN
THOUSAND PARKING SPOTS AT THE
THE CAR CENTRALITY OF THEIR
IRS WAS IT CALLED NOW AND THEN
MAIN STREET EVEN THOUGH FIFTY
THE CAR CENTRALITY OF THEIR
THOUSAND THAT'S WHAT IT FEELS
MAIN STREET EVEN THOUGH FIFTY
LIKE IT FEELS LIKE TWO HUNDRED
THOUSAND THAT'S WHAT IT FEELS
AND FIFTY.
LIKE IT FEELS LIKE TWO HUNDRED
HOW DO YOU SAY CHANGE RETROFIT
AND FIFTY.
TO EXPEDITIOUS ACCELERATION IN
HOW DO YOU SAY CHANGE RETROFIT
ORDER TO DEVELOP REDEVELOPS THE
TO EXPEDITIOUS ACCELERATION IN
WORK WE DEVELOP THREE TO SET UP
ORDER TO DEVELOP REDEVELOPS THE
EXPEDITIOUSLY PROMOTE THE
WORK WE DEVELOP THREE TO SET UP
EXPEDITIOUS REDEVELOPMENT.
EXPEDITIOUSLY PROMOTE THE
YEAH.
EXPEDITIOUS REDEVELOPMENT.
OF CAR ORIENTATED SHOPPING
YEAH.
CENTERS.
OF CAR ORIENTATED SHOPPING
I WOULDN'T EVEN TAKE A LIKE
CENTERS.
THAT.
I WOULDN'T EVEN TAKE A LIKE
I WOULD JUST MAKE ALL OF THEM.
THAT.
YEAH YEAH.
I WOULD JUST MAKE ALL OF THEM.
TO INCREASE THE MIX OF USES AND
YEAH YEAH.
WALKABILITY PERIOD.
TO INCREASE THE MIX OF USES AND
YEAH AND I THINK THAT THE ONE
WALKABILITY PERIOD.
WITH THE STRATEGY UNDERNEATH
YEAH AND I THINK THAT THE ONE
OF THE WHATEVER WE HAVE
WITH THE STRATEGY UNDERNEATH
UNDERNEATH THAT THE CONSIDER
OF THE WHATEVER WE HAVE
APPLYING CURB MANAGEMENT OK
UNDERNEATH THAT THE CONSIDER
IT'S THE NEXT ONE ALSO THAT HAS
APPLYING CURB MANAGEMENT OK
THAT SAME RETRO FIT LANGUAGE SO
IT'S THE NEXT ONE ALSO THAT HAS
WE WOULD JUST WANT TO
THAT SAME RETRO FIT LANGUAGE SO
DEVELOPMENT REDEVELOPMENT.
WE WOULD JUST WANT TO
YEP.
DEVELOPMENT REDEVELOPMENT.
EXPAND SUPPORT INCENTIVES TO
YEP.
ENCOURAGE REDEVELOPMENT AND
EXPAND SUPPORT INCENTIVES TO
THAT MEANS GOING BACK UP TO THE
ENCOURAGE REDEVELOPMENT AND
CHAPTER AND JUST CHANGING
THAT MEANS GOING BACK UP TO THE
COURSE THEY WENT UP THERE TO
CHAPTER AND JUST CHANGING
RETROFIT IS YEAH.
COURSE THEY WENT UP THERE TO
SEARCH AND REPLACE RETROFIT
RETROFIT IS YEAH.
REDEVELOP OK OK I THINK WE'RE
SEARCH AND REPLACE RETROFIT
DONE WITH THIS JUMP IN WELL I
REDEVELOP OK OK I THINK WE'RE
CAN I CAN I ADD SOMETHING TO
DONE WITH THIS JUMP IN WELL I
THE LIST.
CAN I CAN I ADD SOMETHING TO
IT'LL WILL BE SHORT I PROMISE
THE LIST.
YOU JUST IF YOU GO I THINK IT
IT'LL WILL BE SHORT I PROMISE
REALLY WILL BE IF YOU GO BACK
YOU JUST IF YOU GO I THINK IT
UP TO ONE POINT THREE THERE'S A
REALLY WILL BE IF YOU GO BACK
ITEM IN HERE ABOUT IDENTIFYING
UP TO ONE POINT THREE THERE'S A
AND SUPPORTING PROGRAMS LIKE
ITEM IN HERE ABOUT IDENTIFYING
HUD, LITVACK AND AFFORDABLE
AND SUPPORTING PROGRAMS LIKE
HOUSING VILLAGE PROGRAMS AND
HUD, LITVACK AND AFFORDABLE
HAS PLANNING AS THE LEAD UNIT.
HOUSING VILLAGE PROGRAMS AND
IT SEEMS LIKE WE SHOULD ADD
HAS PLANNING AS THE LEAD UNIT.
HOUSING COMMISSION AND AN
IT SEEMS LIKE WE SHOULD ADD
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT THERE.
HOUSING COMMISSION AND AN
>> WHY DO SO SEE A SIMPLE ONE
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT THERE.
THAT'S GREAT.
>> WHY DO SO SEE A SIMPLE ONE
>> I'M SORRY ONE MORE AND THEN
THAT'S GREAT.
I NEED TO LET ME TAKE OUT
>> I'M SORRY ONE MORE AND THEN
OF THIS SO UM SO THAT WAS OUR
I NEED TO LET ME TAKE OUT
STRATEGY ONE POINT THREE YEAH.
OF THIS SO UM SO THAT WAS OUR
>> ONE POINT THREE AND NUMBER
STRATEGY ONE POINT THREE YEAH.
TWO.
>> ONE POINT THREE AND NUMBER
>> YEAH AND OH THIS AS LEADERS
TWO.
OR WHAT'S THE RIGHT NOW THE
>> YEAH AND OH THIS AS LEADERS
ONLY LEAD UNIT IS PLANNING I
OR WHAT'S THE RIGHT NOW THE
JUST BELIEVE IT WOULD MAKE
ONLY LEAD UNIT IS PLANNING I
SENSE TO ADD HOUSING COMMISSION
JUST BELIEVE IT WOULD MAKE
AND MAYBE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
SENSE TO ADD HOUSING COMMISSION
EITHER AS A LEAD UNIT OR A
AND MAYBE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
PARTNER.
EITHER AS A LEAD UNIT OR A
OK WHAT'S THE NEXT THE OTHER
PARTNER.
ONE IS A SMOKE GOING ALL THE
OK WHAT'S THE NEXT THE OTHER
WAY UP TO ONE POINT ONE DID WE
ONE IS A SMOKE GOING ALL THE
GET RID OF THE TERM BUILDING
WAY UP TO ONE POINT ONE DID WE
FORM CONTROLS IN THE DARK?
GET RID OF THE TERM BUILDING
>> WE CAN I KNOW YOU FEEL VERY
FORM CONTROLS IN THE DARK?
STRONGLY.
>> WE CAN I KNOW YOU FEEL VERY
I JUST CAN'T REMEMBER WHAT WE
STRONGLY.
DECIDED.
I JUST CAN'T REMEMBER WHAT WE
>> I WANT TO BE CONSISTENT.
DECIDED.
SO IF WE GOT IF WE DID CHANGE
>> I WANT TO BE CONSISTENT.
IT, LET'S CHANGE IT.
SO IF WE GOT IF WE DID CHANGE
THAT'S ALL I DON'T I DON'T
IT, LET'S CHANGE IT.
REMEMBER US MAKING THAT
THAT'S ALL I DON'T I DON'T
DECISION BUT I'M HAPPY TO DO
REMEMBER US MAKING THAT
THAT.
DECISION BUT I'M HAPPY TO DO
>> WOULD YOU LIKE TO CHANGE IT
THAT.
TO FORM BASE CODE ?
>> WOULD YOU LIKE TO CHANGE IT
>> BUT WE MAY HAVE COME TO A
TO FORM BASE CODE ?
MORE USER FRIENDLY TERM AND
>> BUT WE MAY HAVE COME TO A
IT'S ALSO SOMETHING INTERESTING
MORE USER FRIENDLY TERM AND
WE CAN JUST CONTROL ETHEN
BE
CONSISTENT ABOUT.
>> IT'S NOT A BIG DEAL.
YEAH, REMOVE TERM WHAT IS IT
BUILDING FORM CONTROLS AND IF
THAT'S WHAT IT IS NOW YEAH
REMOVE THAT REMOVE THE PLACE
REPLACE IT WITH FORM BASE
CODE BUT I DON'T THINK THAT'S
WHAT WE AGREED ON AN ATTACK.
SO IF YOU GO BACK AND LOOK AT I
COULD TRY AND I COULD DO THE
BACKGROUND CHECK I'LL DO THE
BACKGROUND NOW AND I'LL COME
BACK TO YOU OK THANK YOU.
SO THOSE THAT'S WHAT WAS
SUBMITTED UNDER DISCUSSION
WHERE WE WANTED TO HAVE A
PUBLIC DISCUSSION ABOUT SOME
OF THESE EDITS.
PLEASE DON'T FORGET THAT
BENEATH THIS THERE ARE SEVERAL
MORE PAGES HERE WHERE STAFF
LOOKED AT THEM AND SAID YES, WE
WILL JUST GO AHEAD AND DO THIS.
NO DISCUSSION NEEDED TO OPEN
THIS UP RIGHT NOW SO MAYBE I
SHOULD GO BUT OK, SO NOW WE CAN
GO TO CHAPTER FIVE SO I WATCHED
THE AUGUST 5TH MEETING.
I WATCHED IT LIVE ACTUALLY SO
THAT WAS FUN AND THERE I AM TO
TRY TO SUMMARIZE WHAT I
OBSERVED AND THEN I'M GOING TO
ASK SOMEONE IF THEY HAVE A
POTENTIAL SOLUTION.
SO AT MY COUNT WE ARE NEARING
SIX HOURS OF DISCUSSION
PRIMARILY RELATED TO THESE 17
CONFLICT POINTS THAT ARE IN THE
LAND USE MAP AND IT IS I THINK
COMMISSIONER AUTON ARTICULATED
AT THE TABLE WHAT I HEARD TO BE
A COGENT ARGUMENT WHICH IS WE
DON'T WANT TO DO THIS
NEIGHBORHOOD BY NEIGHBORHOOD
POINT BY POINT BECAUSE THAT WE
WOULD NEVER FINISH THE PLAN.
IF I'M SUMMARIZING YOUR
SENTIMENT CORRECTLY AND SO I
WONDERED IF GIVEN THE WORK
SESSION THAT WE HAD LAST WEEK,
THE REVISED MAP THAT PLANNER
BINIT PROVIDED AS WELL AS THE
MEMO AND WE GOT A LOT OF PUBLIC
COMMENT TONIGHT ASKING TO
REJECT A NEW ZONING CATEGORY
FOR NEW RESIDENTIAL IF SOMEONE
AT THE TABLE HAD A WAY FOR US
TO RESOLVE THESE 17 CONFLICT
POINTS BECAUSE IF WE CAN
RESOLVE IT TONIGHT WE CAN SHIP
THIS TO THE CONSULTANTS AND WE
WON'T NEED ANOTHER MEETING ON
THE TWENTY SIX AND THEN WE CAN
COME BACK TO OUR THIRD DRAFT
BUT IF WE CAN'T AND I GUESS I
WILL BE THE DETERMINER IF WE
CAN'T WE WILL HAVE TO CALL
ANOTHER MEETING AND SO SO I
WANT TO PUT MY CARDS ON THE
TABLE THAT I DON'T WANT US TO
HAVE TO CALL ANOTHER MEETING.
I THINK WE CAN RESOLVE IT.
I BELIEVE IN YOU.
AND SO COMMISSIONER ADAMS, DO
YOU WANT TO TRY SOMETHING LIKE
THIS ONE?
>> SO I'M SCOTT TRUDEAU SENT IN
A SUGGESTION TO TAKE ANYTHING
AWAY.
WE'RE STRUGGLING TO PUT IN
RESIDENTIAL TRANSITION AND CALL
IT IT OR DON'T PUT IN ONE OR
THE OTHER BUT LABEL IT ON THE
MAP AS AN ORDER AND LEAVE IT UP
TO ZONING TO MAKE THE FINE
TUNING IN THE SCALPEL WORK
AROUND WHERE IT GOES.
I THINK PART OF WHAT WE'RE
STRUGGLING WITH IS JUST THAT
THESE ARE TOUGH CASES.
THE CATEGORIES THE DISTRICTS
GOT MOVED ON US AS WE WERE
MOVING THROUGH THE PROCESS AND
IF WE'RE STUCK ON WHETHER THERE
SHOULD BE ONE OR THE OTHER, I
THINK IT'S A BAD SOLUTION TO
MAKE A NEW DISTRICT ON THE FLY
WHEN WE CAN DELEGATE THE TASK
PROPERLY FOR THE TOUGH CASES TO
ZONING TO TACKLE FOR US WE CAN
ALSO TAKE A SWING AT A FEW
OF THESE.
BUT YOU KNOW, COUNCIL MEMBER,
JUST TO YOUR POINT, YOU'VE BEEN
STRUGGLING WITH THE PLYMOUTH
ROAD CORRIDOR AND A WAY OUT
OF THE BOX IS TO SAY WE WILL
SOLVE THAT IN ZONING.
WE DON'T NEED TO MAKE A PRECISE
RECOMMENDATION AND OUR PROCESS
ISN'T SET UP TO MAKE THESE
DETERMINATIONS AND LOOK AT
THINGS LIKE TRAFFIC STUDIES FOR
ONE PARCEL AND WE CAN JUST SAY
ON OUR MAP IT'S AN ORDER AND
WE'LL DEAL WITH IT WHEN WE GET
ZONING.
WE'VE HANDLED THE REST OF THE
MAP.
WE SHOULDN'T GET STUCK AND
DELAY OUR PROCESS BY A MONTH OR
MORE OVER A FEW OF THESE.
SO THAT WOULD BE MY PROPOSAL
FOR THE REMAINING PARCELS, THE
ONES THAT WE'VE ALREADY
DISPOSITIONED INTO HUB AND
TRANSITION WE WOULD LEAVE ALONE
AND THE REMAINING I CAN'T
REMEMBER IF IT'S IT'S LIKE A
SEVEN, EIGHT, NINE KIND OF NO
THOSE WOULD GO TO AN CATEGORY
WITH THE EXCEPTION OF MAYBE THE
GOLF COURSE WHAT THE PRIVATE
GOLF COURSES WE MIGHT BE ABLE
TO TAKE A POSITION ON.
BUT THE RESIDENTIAL ONES I
THINK WE CAN SAY THIS IS
RESIDENTIAL OR TRANSITION ON
OUR MAP WITH JUST A DIFFERENT
COLOR OR CROSSHATCHING OR
SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
>> SO I THINK THAT THAT WOULD
MAKE GOOD SENSE.
I WOULD WANT TO REQUEST THAT
THAT THE UNDERSTANDING
OF RESIDENTIAL THAT WAS THE
ORIGINAL LANGUAGE FROM COUNCIL
WHICH CONTAINED THE PROVISION
THAT LARGER BUILDING TYPOLOGIES
ARE AUTHORIZED IN THE WHERE
THEY WOULD FIT INTO EXISTING
NEIGHBORHOOD CONTEXTS WOULD BE
BACK BECAUSE I DON'T I REALLY
DON'T THINK THE COUNCIL MEANT
TO SAY THAT ONLY THREE STOREY
TRIPLEX IS NOTHING BIGGER
BECAUSE THE IDEA IS TO NOT MAKE
THINGS THAT ARE ALREADY BIGGER
UNBUILDABLE AND THEN I THINK
THAT IF IF WE COULD PUT IN
TRANSITION THE LANGUAGE
OF INFILL BECAUSE I MEAN I
THINK THAT I HAD JUST A LOT
OF ISSUES WHEN WE WERE PUTTING
TRANSITION ON THE PLACES THAT
ARE SUBURBAN LIKE ENCLAVES AND
IT DIDN'T FEEL LIKE TRANSITION
TO ME BECAUSE THEY WEREN'T ON
ARTERIALS.
BUT THEN I WAS THINKING ABOUT
THE PLACES WHERE WE HAVE
APPROVED INFILL HOUSING AND WE
HAVE THEY'VE NEEDED SOMETIMES
ZONING CATEGORIES LIKE AH FOR A
HIGHER R FOR IN ORDER TO MAKE
THAT POSSIBLE WHICH IS KIND
OF LIKE TRANSITION AND SO YEAH
WELL ALL OF THAT INFO YEAH I
WOULD SUPPORT THAT ALL OF THEM
YEAH.
I GUESS I'M JUST THINKING WHEN
WE HAVE DONE INFILL IN THOSE
FUNNY PLACES YOU KNOW THERE WAS
A MIKE MARTIN PROJECT AND YOU
GUYS REMEMBER I MEAN THERE'S MY
DEGREE WAS AN INFILL PROJECT
RIGHT.
>> A RECENT AND IN IN THESE
YEAH GO AHEAD SIR I'M SORRY I
LIKE NOT SARAH'S TOTALLY FINE
ESPECIALLY WHEN THERE'S ONLY
ONE OF US TONIGHT I I GET WHAT
YOU'RE SAYING AND I WOULD SAY
EVERYTHING THAT WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT IN THE ANN ARBOR IS GOING
TO BE INFILL AND FIELD
RESIDENTIAL AND SO I THINK THAT
THAT'S WHERE I SHOULD BE.
>> I'M A LITTLE WAIT IT'S NOT
LET ME HAVE GREENFIELD
PROPERTIES THAT HAVE NEVER BEEN
DEVELOPED.
THERE'S VERY FEW LOTS OF LIKE
THE LIKE A I WOULD JUST LIKE
YOU KNOW, SAW WHAT'S HAPPENING
AT BRIARWOOD OR ARBOR SOUTH OR
WHAT WE JUST APPROVED ON SB
NONE OF THAT MEANS UNTIL IT'S
REDEVELOPMENT IT'S YEAH SO BUT
THOSE ARE DIFFERENT THINGS AT
LEAST FROM AN ARCHITECTURAL
STANDPOINT.
YEAH.
INFILL IS LIKE FILLING IN AN
EXISTING URBAN FABRIC A STREET
WALL LIKE IT'S IT'S LIKE A
MISSING TOOTH YOU KNOW.
>> YEAH.
THESE PLACES LIKE BRIARWOOD
PARKING LOT THAT'S NOT INVOLVED
IN MY MIND BUT THE PLACES THAT
WE'VE HAD I MEAN THE PLACES
WHERE LIKE PROJECTS WHERE THEY
PUT AN APARTMENT LIKE A FOUR
STORY APARTMENT IN A PLACE THAT
WAS CUL DE SACS IT'S WEIRD
BECAUSE IT'S NOT THE SAME.
>> YEAH BUT THAT'S ALL OVER THE
CITY SO SO YEAH.
>> LIKE HILL IS ON THE MAP OFF
OF MAIN STREET IS ZONED
TRANSITION IN THE MIDDLE
OF RESIDENTIAL BECAUSE IT WAS
ZONED OUT FOR TO GET IT BUILT.
>> YEAH AND THAT'S WHAT I'M
SAYING THAT IT MAKES ME MORE
COMFORTABLE WITH PUTTING
TRANSITION AND SOME OF THOSE
CUL DE SAC KIND OF PLACES IF
YEAH BUT I REALIZED THAT INFILL
ISN'T REALLY THE RIGHT WORD SO
I JUST NEED TO LET GO OF THIS
AND LET US MOVE ON.
WELL I THINK I I COULD I THINK
I UNDERSTAND STAND BECAUSE
THERE IS A DEVELOPMENT I'M
ALWAYS BAD ON STREETS ON THE
NORTH IN DICKSON OR NEXEN THEY
CAME TO THEY BUILT IT OUT THEN
THEY CAME TO THE TABLE BECAUSE
THEY WANT THEY THEY SAW THE
NEED AND THEY WANT IT TO TAKE
OUT PARKING AND PUT IN NEW
DEVELOPMENT.
DO WE CALL THAT REDEVELOPMENT
OR DO WE CALL THAT INFILL
BECAUSE IT'S INSIDE A FULL
FULLY BUILT OUT.
>> YEAH, HOUSING DEVELOPMENT.
YEAH.
AND THAT COULD BE TRANSITION
AND THEN IT FILLS BETTER
BECAUSE IT'S NOT SORT
OF CONVEYING SOMETHING MORE.
WHEN I FIRST GOT TO THE TABLE
FIRST MARTIN DID THAT WITH
THEIR DEVELOPMENT UNITS ON THE
SOUTH SIDE.
THEY HAD A BIG OPEN FIELD IN
THE MIDDLE OF A FULLY DEVELOPED
APARTMENT COMPLEX AND THEN THEY
WERE LIKE WE'RE GOING TO ADD
TEN MORE UNITS AND I WAS LIKE
OH COULD YOU THAT WAS MY FIRST
FORAY INTO ASKING DEVELOPERS
FOR THINGS AND THE DEVELOPER
WAS LIKE IT'S NOT IN THE CODE .
WE'RE NOT GOING TO DO.
AND I WAS LIKE OH THIS IS FUN
AND I WAS JUST ASKING FOR A
SOLAR POWERED CARPORTS OH
AND
THEY'RE LIKE THE CODE REQUIRES
THREE EV CHARGERS.
WE'RE GOING TO PUT IN THREE BUT
THAT I THOUGHT OF THAT AS AN
INFILL THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT I
HAVE IN MIND AND YET THE LOVE
FROM THE ROBERTSON BROTHERS IF
THAT HAD THE HARD TIME WITH THE
GARBAGE CARTS YES.
WE WENT BACK AND FORTH ON THAT
WITH THEM.
THAT'S THAT'S WHAT I'M THINKING
IN THAT KIND OF TRANSITION
FEELS RIGHT TO ME FOR THOSE
PLACES OR IF IF I ENVISION THAT
AS TRANSITION THEN I FEEL
REALLY MUCH BETTER ABOUT YEAH I
AND I I CAN SUPPORT THAT
BECAUSE IF YOU'RE SAYING IT'S
ALREADY IN TRANSITION AND PHIL
IS ALREADY IN TRANSITION AND
COMMISSIONER MILLS IS SAYING
INFILL IS ALREADY IN
RESIDENTIAL I DON'T SEE WHY WE
CAN'T JUST YOU KNOW, JUST MAKE
A NOTE AND THEN IF YOU CAN'T
FIGURE OUT HOW TO WORK IT AND
JUST COME BACK AND TELL US YOU
COULDN'T FIGURE OUT HOW TO WORK
IT.
>> CAN I ASK BECAUSE I'M I'M
GETTING A BIT LOST HERE SO
STARTING WITH THIS WE ARE
REJECTING THIS RIGHT.
WE ARE TRYING TO START YES.
>> WE ARE REJECTING THIS AS
PRESENTED TO US.
>> WE WOULD GO BACK TO I MAY
NEED TO JUST RESTATE WHAT I
BECAUSE WE GOT YEAH.
>> YOU COULD REINSTATE THAT.
>> YEAH.
SO THE SCOT TRUDEAU WROTE IN
AND SUGGESTED MOVE TO CLASSIFY
THE IT'S ABOUT TEN PARCELS THAT
WE HAVEN'T CATEGORIZED INTO
EITHER RESIDENTIAL OR
TRANSITION AS RESIDENTIAL OR
TRANSITION ON OUR MAP THERE'S A
LOT LIKE ON THE LEGEND THAT
WOULD SAY RESIDENTIAL OR
TRANSITION AND WOULD EITHER
HAVE A HATCHING OR SO JUST TAKE
WHAT YOU CURRENTLY HAVE.
YEAH RESIDENTIAL RIGHT THAT AND
SAY RESIDENTIAL OR TRANSIT
RESIDENTIAL TRANSITION YOU IF
YOU'RE ACTUALLY JUST BECAUSE
YEAH I SO I'M JUST I'VE THIS IS
VERY CREATIVE.
I'VE NEVER SEEN THIS BEFORE.
IT SOUNDS LIKE NEITHER HAS
MANAGER LEINERT BUT UM I THINK
THAT IT DOESN'T MEAN THAT IT'S
NEVER HAPPENED AND IT I I THINK
WE CAN GO AHEAD WITH I'VE NEVER
SEEN A FUTURE LAND USE MAP THAT
SAYS THIS OR THAT WILL LET YOU
KNOW LATER BUT AS A GUIDANCE
DOCUMENT IT FEELS LIKE
SOMETHING WE CAN DO.
IT DOESN'T IT FEELS ARTIFICIAL
TO TRY TO AND ALSO THAT PROCESS
TO TRY TO CREATE SOMETHING ON
THE FLY HERE WHEN YEAH I THINK
I THINK THE FEEL THE THING I'M
PROCESSING IS I'M NOT IN
SUPPORT OF US CREATING A NEW
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT TO SOLVE
THIS PROBLEM AND I THINK THIS
GIVES US AN OPPORTUNITY TO MOVE
THIS FORWARD AND THEN WE CAN
SORT OF PROCESS WHAT I HEARD
FROM COMMISSIONER DISH EARLIER
WHICH IS WE WANT TO PUT BACK
THE TOPOLOGIES WHICH I THINK I
SET THE LANGUAGE TO YOU ABOUT
THAT BECAUSE IT WAS MISSING
FROM YOUR MEMO FROM LAST WEEK
AND WHEN YOU PUT THAT BACK IN
IT CAN START TO RESOLVE SOME
OF THE CONFLICT POINTS AND THEN
WE WILL HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY TO
ADDRESS IT WHEN WE GO TO DO THE
ZONING BECAUSE WE'VE BEEN TOLD
OVER AND OVER AGAIN THAT THE
LAND USE MAP IS NOT THE ZONING
MAP.
CORRECT.
AND SO WHAT WE ARE LOOKING AT
IS TO SAY HERE'S HOW WE WANT TO
TREAT THESE.
WE WANT TO TREAT THEM WITH A
CLEAR DEFINITION OF A ZONING
FOR RESIDENTIAL VERSUS A CLEAR
ZONING EMERGENCE FROM
TRANSITION.
WE JUST CAN'T DO IT HERE AT THE
TABLE BECAUSE THERE'S AS DAN AS
A COMMISSIONER ADAM SAID
COUNCIL SENT MEMOS AS WE WERE
WORKING WHICH SORT
OF INTERRUPTED EFFECTIVELY
INTERRUPTED SOME OF THE WORK SO
THAT THAT'S A JUSTIFICATION I
THINK FOR THAT'S IT'S MAKING
MORE SENSE TO ME AS WE GO.
>> I WOULD MAYBE WANT
ALTERNATIVE LAND TO IMPLEMENT
MEASURES IF THERE WAS MAYBE
SOME CRITERIA OR A BIT MORE
GUIDELINES WRITTEN AS TO LIKE
WHAT WE MIGHT CONSIDER OF WHICH
WAY TO GO IN THE FUTURE WHEN IT
COMES TO ZONING.
I MEAN THAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN
AT THE TABLE BECAUSE WE HAD
ZONING IT RIGHT.
>> BUT I THINK THE GUIDANCE
DOCUMENT YES.
FINANCE DOCUMENT THAT WILL BE
CONSIDERED AS DELIBERATE WITH
NO NO I'M NOT ARGUING THAT
POINT.
>> COMMISSIONER NORTON AND
MILLS BOTH HAVE RAISED THEIR
HANDS.
I THINK MILLS DID FIRST AND
THEN COMMISSIONER NORTON.
BUT YOU ALL CAN DIFFER, JOHN.
I'VE THAT I'VE COME CLOSER TO
THE MICROPHONE.
I WILL JUST SAY FOR ME THESE
ARE REALLY I I LIKE THAT
THERE'S A COUPLE THAT I WANT TO
VOTE BACK WHICH I THINK THE
PROPOSAL WAS I ACTUALLY WENT
THROUGH
NO ONE'S LOOKING AT THE
MAP WITHOUT KNOWING WHAT WE DID
BEFORE.
I WANT TO TAKE THEM BACK.
I WANT THEM TO GO BACK TO
TRANSITION SO SO IT'S OF ONCE
IT'S THE ONES THAT WERE NOT
TREATED BUT THE REASON FOR ME
IN DOING THIS IS THAT DECIDING
WHETHER THEY'RE TRANSITION OR
RESIDENTIAL REALLY DEPENDS HOW
WE INTEND THE INTENT STATEMENTS
WITHIN THOSE ZONING
CLASSIFICATIONS.
AND AGAIN, IF ULTIMATELY
BECAUSE NOW I'M TALKING ABOUT
ZONING LIKE I THINK HOW WE
CONSTRUCT THE ZONING DISTRICTS
ULTIMATELY WILL DETERMINE IN MY
MIND WHETHER THEY'RE MORE
WHETHER THEY WHETHER THEY TAKE
THE FLAVOR MORE OF HOW WE ARE
THINKING ABOUT THE RESIDENTIAL
ZONING DISTRICTS OR TAKE THE
FLAVOR OF THE TRANSITION
DISTRICTS AND BECAUSE SOME
OF THOSE SPECIFICS WE ARE NOT
DOING HERE I THAT'S WHY I THINK
AND I THINK WE CAN SAY LOOK
THERE IT MIGHT DEPEND
ULTIMATELY HOW IN MY MIND HOW
DO WE MOVE TO ZONING AND HOW
MANY RESIDENTIAL ZONING
DISTRICTS THERE ARE AND HOW
MANY RESIDENTIAL TRANSITION
DISTRICTS THERE ARE FOR HOW
EACH OF THEM ARE TAPERED OR HOW
THIS IDEA OF THINKING ABOUT THE
CONTEXT ACTUALLY IS TO BE
TRANSLATED WHICH WE'RE NOT
DOING HERE.
>> BUT I THAT'S THAT'S WHY I'M
HAPPY TO PUNCH UP PERSONALLY SO
EACH ONE OF THESE LAND USE
CATEGORIES DOES HAVE AN INTENT
AND A RATIONALE WRITTEN INTO
THEM ALREADY WHICH WOULD BE THE
GUIDANCE FOR HOW TO WRITE THE
INTENT FOR THE ZONE IN IT
EXCEPT IN MY MIND IF THERE ARE
ONLY TO BE FOUR ZONES WHICH
MAYBE WILL FIGHT THAT OUT LATER
BUT I'VE HEARD BEFORE THERE
WILL BE MORE THAN THAT.
THERE WILL BE MORE IN FOUR
ZONES AND SO I HEARD BEFORE
THAT THERE MIGHT BE FOUR MORE
THAN FOUR ZONES AND SO IF THAT
IS TRUE AND THERE'S ONLY A
DIFFERENTIATION WITHIN WHAT
WE'RE SORRY I WRITE EACH
OF THOSE ZONING DISTRICTS IS
GOING TO HAVE A DIFFERENT
INTENT AND SO THAT'S WHERE I
THINK WILL COME FROM THE EDGE
OF RESIDENTIAL AND TRANSITION
IS WHERE WILL ULTIMATELY MIGHT
HELP.
ALL RIGHT, NORTON AND THEN
COMMISSIONER COUNCILMAN
BRITISH.
>> SO THE WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO
DO IN THIS PLAN IS CREATE A
GENERAL POLICY DOCUMENT THAT
DOESN'T COME BACK TO PARCEL
LEVEL OR NEIGHBORHOOD SPECIFIC
PLANNING LIKE WE HAD IN THE
PAST WHICH IS REALLY
PROBLEMATIC TO SOLVE CITYWIDE
PROBLEMS.
WE'RE TRYING TO SIMPLIFY IT.
SO WE'VE GOT THESE REALLY BROAD
CATEGORIES.
UM, WE DEVELOPED A LOGIC FOR
HOW TO TAKE THE CURRENT
EXISTING ZONING SCHEME PLUS
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS LIKE
PROXIMITY TO TRANSIT CORRIDORS
AND OTHER DEVELOPMENT TO CREATE
A FIRST CUT THE FUTURE LAND USE
MAP AND WE ENDED UP WITH A
HANDFUL OF SITES THAT WERE
REALLY PROBLEMATIC.
SOME OF THEM WERE BECAUSE THEY
LOOKED TO BE RESIDENTIAL BUT
THERE ARE MORE DENSE THAN WHAT
THE CONCEPTUALIZATION
RESIDENTIAL WAS.
I THINK IF THE WAY I KNOW THAT
YOU'VE BEEN TALKING ABOUT THIS
IF POSTURE IS THAT IN THESE NOW
DESIGNEE RESIDENTIAL AREAS THE
STARTING POINT THE PRESUMPTION
IS TO HAVE THREE UNITS, THREE
STORIES BUT THERE COULD BE MORE
GIVEN THE CONTEXT.
NOW WE'RE NOT DOWN ZONING EVEN
THOUGH WE WERE NEVER ZONING BUT
NOW WE'RE NOT DONE ZONING BY
INCLUDING THE FOUR AREAS THAT
ARE IN DISTRICTS AND
RESIDENTIAL BECAUSE THEY'RE THE
CONTEXT IS MORE DEVELOPMENT.
SO THAT KIND OF TAKES CARE
OF THAT PROBLEM AND THEN WE'RE
LEFT WITH THESE SITES.
THE WAY I WOULD PHRASE IT IS
NOT THAT WE'RE HUNTING BUT
BECAUSE WE'RE SIMPLIFYING THERE
ARE A HANDFUL OF SITES THAT
HAVE ATTRIBUTES BOTH OF WHAT
WE'RE TRYING TO DO WITH
RESIDENTIAL AND ATTRIBUTES.
WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO POSITION
YES.
IT'S NOT CLEAR RIGHT NOW WHICH
IS THE BETTER CASE AND THAT
SOMETHING CAN BE BETTER
RESOLVED THROUGH THE ZONING
PROCESS THAT I FULLY AGREE AND
THIS IS RARE FOR COMMISSIONER
NORTON NO CHANGES WHATSOEVER
THE ONLY THING IN TERMS
OF RESTATING IT.
RIGHT.
SO WE WANT TO REVERT TO THE
CHANGES TO RESIDENTIAL.
>> I WAS GOING TO ASK SO DO YOU
WANT YOU WANT TO GO BACK TO
WHAT WE DO THEN RESOLVE?
YES, WE WANT TO RESOLVE THE
PARCELS THAT WE RESOLVED AND
THEN THERE WAS SOME LANGUAGE IN
RESIDENTIAL THAT WE EXECUTED
WITH SOME MODIFICATIONS THAT
WERE SUGGESTED BY STAFF TO
EXECUTE THE CITY COUNCIL
RESOLUTION THAT WE WOULD GO
BACK TO AND REVERT TO THAT
LANGUAGE.
>> ALL RIGHT.
AND THAT WE NEED TO HOLD UP WE
NEED TO HEAR COMMISSIONER
DESPOTISMS MODIFICATION TO THAT
GOING BACK TO THE THINGS THAT
WE HAD BECAUSE I YEAH BECAUSE
WELL THAT WOULD BE THE MIDDLE
CAP MIDDLE THE MIDDLE.
>> SO THAT'S WHAT I
UNDERSTANDING IS THAT I WOULD
GO TO THAT MIDDLE COLUMN AND
CHANGE ALL OF THOSE BACK TO THE
ONES THAT ARE RESOLVED TO THE
CATEGORIES THAT YOU ALL PICKED
AND THEN FOR THE ONES THAT ARE
UNRESOLVED I WOULD PUT AS
RESIDENTIAL IN TRANSITION
EXCEPT FOR WHAT COMMISSIONER
DISH IS GOING TO GIVE US.
OK, SO I WANTED TO SAY THAT I
HAD THOUGHT A LOT ABOUT ONE
WHICH I CITE ONE CITE ONE THANK
AND WHILE I AM I WISH THAT THE
ROUNDABOUT WOULD HAPPEN REALLY
SOON I FEEL LIKE THAT'S A VERY
PRECIOUS PARCEL AND RESTRICTING
IT ISN'T I THINK IT SHOULD HAVE
AS MUCH FLEXIBILITY AS IT CAN
SO I I DON'T THINK IT NEEDS TO
BE UNRESOLVED.
I THINK IT CAN BE TRANSITIONED
WHICH IS WHAT STAFF HAD
SUGGESTED.
THERE'S A LOT OF RESIDENTIAL
AROUND THERE.
TRANSITION IS A TAPERING
CATEGORY AND PEOPLE DO WANT A
STORE THERE.
YEAH.
LIKE THEY REALLY DO.
>> AND SO I THINK THAT MY I WAS
VERY HUNG UP ON SOME
FRUSTRATIONS AROUND THE TRAFFIC
BUT I FEEL LIKE I DON'T WANT
THAT TO BE UNRESOLVED HOWEVER
AND I DON'T I DON'T KNOW I
DON'T KNOW THAT OUR PLAN TALKS
ABOUT NATURALLY OCCURRING
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AT ALL.
IT'S FRANCE.
>> IT IS.
IT'S IN THERE.
OK, IT'S IN THERE IS A TERM I
THINK THAT SOME OF THESE
DECISIONS ABOUT WHERE THESE GO
SHOULD THINK ABOUT THAT.
OK AND SO WITH THAT IN MIND, I
HAVE HAD FEEDBACK ABOUT FOUR
AND SEVEN AND I THINK WHAT WE
ALL HAVE BECAUSE CHRIS WATSON
COUNCIL MEMBER WATSON WROTE TO
US AND OFFERED FEEDBACK THAT
THOSE ARE AREAS WHERE RENTS ARE
CHEAP AND I WOULD RATHER SEE
THAT BE UNRESOLVED THAN A
DECISION FOR TRANSITION IN
THOSE AREAS.
BUT AGAIN, I'M PUTTING THIS ON
THE TABLE.
I WOULD LIKE SOME TEXT AROUND,
YOU KNOW, THIS GUIDANCE TEXT
THAT YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT THAT
YOU AND THAT MICHELLE YOU AND
SARAH WERE TALKING ABOUT THAT
THAT IS ONE OF THE FACTORS I
WOULD THINK ABOUT WHERE WE GO
WITH SOMETHING WHETHER WHETHER
YOU I MEAN AGAIN THE TRANSITION
CATEGORY IS VERY BROAD AND SO
YOU CAN PUT ANYTHING IN IT
BECAUSE IT REALLY DOES START AT
THREE STORIES AND SO CAN I.
>> YES, YOU CAN.
OK, SO I MADE A NOTE OF CITES
FOUR AND SEVEN WHICH WERE
ALREADY VOTED ON BUT YOU'D LIKE
TO REVISIT SO I WANT TO COME
BACK TO THAT TO ALLOW YOU TO
REVISIT IT.
LET ME HEAR FROM COMMISSIONER
LEA BECAUSE YOU STARTED TALKING
AT THE SAME TIME THAT
COMMISSIONER DID NOT WANT TO
MAKE SURE YOU YEAH.
>> THANKS.
I'M ON BOARD WITH THE
RECOMMENDATION THAT WE'VE PUT
FORTH HERE.
THE ONLY THING THAT I WANTED TO
JUST MAKE SURE THAT I
UNDERSTOOD CLEARLY WAS THE
LANGUAGE EXECUTING COUNCIL'S
VISION WITH RESPECT TO THE
DUPLEX TRIPLEX BEING BY RIGHT.
AND THEN OTHER LARGER
BUILDINGS.
I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE
BECAUSE WE'VE THROWN AROUND
LOOSER TERMS LIKE CAPS, FLOORS
OR CEILINGS BUT THEY'RE NOT
REALLY IN CAPS HERE.
I'M I'M READING THE VERY
SPECIFIC LANGUAGE THAT COUNCIL
PASSED AND ONE OF THE THINGS
THAT I JUST WANT TO SAY IT
LITERALLY SAYS RIGHT HERE CITY
COUNCIL VALUES AND INCREMENTAL,
PRACTICAL, PREDICTABLE APPROACH
TO RESIDENTIAL INFILL THAT
ENABLES SMALL SCALE MULTIFAMILY
HOUSING DUPLEXES AND TRI PLEXUS
IN THE RESIDENTIAL CARE
CATEGORY USING FORM BASE
STANDARDS THE GUIDE DESIGN BUT
THAT DOES NOT ENTITLE SMALL
APARTMENT BUILDINGS IN LARGER
SCALE DEVELOPMENTS THROUGHOUT
THAT CATEGORY.
SO I THINK THAT THE CONCEPT
THERE AND PLEASE CORRECT I'M
WRONG COUNCIL MEMBER DISHES
THAT THIS IS BASICALLY SAYING
LIKE DUPLEX AND TRIPLEX SHOULD
BE BY RIGHT.
LARGER DEVELOPMENTS SHOULD BE
REALLY CONSIDERED IN THE
OVERALL CONTEXT AND SHE PUT IT
BACK IN IN THE DOCUMENT AND
JUST I WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT
THAT IS YEAH.
>> UNDER PRIMARY USES BUILDING
TYPES THE FIRST BULLET POINT
SHE ADDED AND THAT SHOULD BE
ADDRESSED.
IT'S IT'S IN NOW SO ADDITIONAL
BUILDING TYPES ALLOWED WE'RE
CONSISTENT WITH NEIGHBORHOOD
FORM AND SCALE WHICH IS TAKEN
FROM THE COUNCIL RESOLUTION.
THAT WAS A MISTAKE ON MY OWN
FROM THE LAST MEETING I SENT IT
TO HER.
YES I DID.
>> TO ALSO PLEASE NOTE THAT I
DID CROSS OUT SMALL APARTMENTS
BECAUSE THAT WOULDN'T BE A
PRIMARY USE.
>> THE WAY I READ COUNCIL'S
RESOLUTION IS THAT IT IS
CONSIDERED RIGHT.
SO SO THAT IS CROSSED OUT IF
WE'RE OK WITH THAT AND THEN WE
ADDED A SINGLE FAMILY BECAUSE
THAT IS STILL A PRIMARY USE BUT
WE PUT BACK AT THE COTTAGE
COURTS IN THE STACK FLAKS WHICH
IS GOOD SO WE CAN WE CAN
ENTERTAIN.
>> SO HERE'S WHAT I WANT TO DO.
OK, GO AHEAD CHARLY.
NO, I WAS JUST GOING TO CLARIFY
THAT THE RESOLVED CLAUSE STATES
RECOMMENDATIONS OF RANGE INFILL
OPTIONS IN THE RESIDENTIAL
CATEGORY WERE DUPLEXES AND
TRIPLEX IS ARE PROVIDED
WIDESPREAD OPPORTUNITY AND EASE
OF DEVELOPMENT WHERE LARGER
BUILDING TYPOLOGIES ARE
AUTHORIZED ONLY WHERE THEY
WOULD FIT INTO THE EXISTING
NEIGHBORHOOD CONTEXT.
>> SO I JUST WANT TO CLARIFY A
LITTLE WHEREAS RELATIVE TO THE
RESULTS AND WE WE STRUCK
CONTEXT AT THIS TABLE AND WE
REPLACED WOULD FORM IN SCALE OK
PERFECT BECAUSE CONTEXT IS A
PRECURSOR TO CHARACTER AND
CHARACTER AS ITS RACIAL
CONNOTATIONS SO TWO THINGS I
THINK THERE ARE TWO THINGS ON
THE TABLE AND I THINK WE CAN BE
FINISHED WELL WELL I'M SORRY TO
BE THE BEARER OF BAD NEWS BUT
THERE ARE MORE THINGS UNDER
EDITS BUT I DO THINK WE CAN GO
THROUGH THEM QUICKLY BECAUSE
WE'VE ADDRESSED THEM ALL WITH
OUR NEW DECISION.
BUT I JUST WANT TO CONFIRM AS A
GROUP THAT THERE'S NOT ONE MORE
OUTSTANDING.
SO MAYBE IF WE GO TO THE LAST
REMAINING THINGS AND I'D LIKE
TO GO BACK TO THE EDIT PAGE OR
MAKE SURE THAT WE'VE
COVERED EVERYTHING IN CHAPTER
FIVE ABSOLUTELY REVIEW DECISION
.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
ALL RIGHT.
SO COMMISSIONER DISH, I WANT TO
CLARIFY WITH YOU THAT THE TABLE
RESOLVED CITES FOUR AND SEVEN
WITH A VOTE.
SO WE WE TOOK A VOTE AND THEN
WE PLACE THEM INTO TRANSITION
AND YOU ARE ASKING TO
RECONSIDER AND STRIKE THEM FROM
TRANSITION TO UNRESOLVED, IS
THAT CORRECT?
>> AND UNRESOLVED PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTIONS?
>> YES, THAT'S WHAT IT WILL BE
.
ALL RIGHT.
SO IS THAT WHAT YOU ARE
PROPOSING?
YES.
GREAT.
>> LET'S DO A STRAW POLL.
RIGHT TO WHICH YOU ARE CONFUSED
BECAUSE I'M SURE IT'S IT'S FOUR
AND SEVEN AND IF YOU WE GOT A
LETTER FROM THAT THAT'S BEFORE
THIS WAS THE CASE SO YEAH.
NO THAT'S WHY I THINK I THINK
WE KNOW WHAT IF THAT'S OK.
I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE I GIVE
YOU AN OPPORTUNITY TO PRESENT
WHAT YOUR NOTICE IS.
SO I THINK I RUN THOSE BECAUSE
THEY'RE STRAW I'M STRUCK WE'RE
NOT DOING A MOTION OK, SO ALL
IN FAVOR OF COMMISSIONER DISHES
SUGGESTION VOTE BY SAYING YES
PUT YOUR HANDS UP SO I CAN
COUNT YOU.
>> YEAH, WE HAVE FOUR WE HAVE
FIVE ALL THOSE AGAINST WE HAVE
THREE SO IT PASSES AND IT MOVES
NOW TO RESIDENTIAL OR
TRANSITION.
ALL RIGHT THEN SORRY I KNOW YOU
HAVE SOMETHING THIS GOLF COURSE
ON YOUR LIST BUT I CAN'T TALK
ABOUT GOLF COURSES.
I HAVE BEEN QUOTED IN THE PAPER
WE GOT RESTATED MY ASSUMPTION
WAS THAT GOLF COURSES JUST GOT
DUMPED INTO RESIDENTIAL
RESIDENTIAL TRANSITION.
>> YES.
YES.
SO I'M NOT IN THE INTEREST
OF MOVING FORWARD AND GETTING
THIS BACK IN THE HANDS OF THE
CONSULTANTS.
I'M OK AND WITH THE WITH THE
UNDERSTANDING ASSUMPTION THAT
THOSE GOLF COURSES AREN'T GOING
ANYWHERE.
YES, I THAT I'M NOT DOWN THAT
HILL BUT I DO HAVE LIKE TWO
MINOR SO YOU CAN YOU CAN
BUCKETT THEM WHEREVER YOU WANT
TO KNOW.
YES.
ALL RIGHT.
I LOST MY SECOND ONE BUT OH
THIS IT IS INAPPROPRIATE FOR
THE CHAIR TO MAKE MOTION SO I
WOULD ENTERTAIN EMOTION FROM
THE TABLE TO RETURN SMALL
APARTMENT TO THE PRIMARY USE
BUILDING TYPES UNDER ON PAGE
TWO OF PLANNER BENITZ MEMMO
WITH THE PARENTHETICAL THAT
THESE MUST FIT LIKE AGAIN IT'S
TOWARDS THE NEIGHBORHOOD
FOREMAN SCALE.
>> CAN I MAKE A FRIENDLY
AMENDMENT OR IS THAT ONLY FOR
COMMISSIONERS?
IT'S ONLY FOR COMMISSIONERS BUT
YOU HAVE THE CONTENT SO YOU CAN
SAY WHAT YOU LIKE.
WHAT IF WE JUST HAVE A SECOND
HEADER THAT'S A SECONDARY USAGE
.
I LOVE HOW YOU THINK AND I
WITHDRAW MY REQUEST FOR THE
TABLE TO PRODUCE A MOTION AND I
YIELD THE FLOOR BACK TO YOU AND
WE'RE NOW DONE.
OK, SO I WORK FOR NOW I HAVE
POWER.
OK SO NOW WE'RE BACK SO OK SO
THIS IS WHAT I THINK WE CAN DO
QUITE QUICKLY UNDER CHAPTER
FIVE THE VERY FIRST THING THAT
WE HAD NOTED ON CHAPTER FIVE
WAS THE MAP THAT WE'VE JUST
SPENT SEVERAL MEETINGS ON.
SO UNDERNEATH ARE SEVERAL OTHER
THINGS BUT I THINK MOST OF THEM
HAVE ALREADY BEEN ADDRESSED IN
OUR LAST CONVERSATION.
SO I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT THAT'S THE CASE.
SO FOR EXAMPLE, THIS THIS
COMMENT RIGHT HERE IS THEY WANT
TO UNDERSCORE THAT WE SHOULD
NOT BE DOWN
ZONING.
SO I THINK WE HAVE TALKED ABOUT
THAT AT LENGTH AND ARE DOING
OUR BEST NOT TO DO SO.
THERE IS A COMMENT HERE THAT
AREAS THAT HAVE HUB DIRECTLY
ADJACENT TO RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT SHOULD HUB HAVE SOME
TYPE OF BUFFER FROM RESIDENTIAL
THROUGH TRANSITION.
SO THAT MIGHT BE SOMETHING TO
DISCUSS BUT I DO THINK THE NEXT
ONE HAS ALREADY BEEN ANSWERED
WHERE IT SAYS THE CURRENT DROP
DOWN ZONES AND IT NAMES A LOT
OF THESE AREAS WE'VE ALREADY
BEEN DISCUSSING SO I WOULD SAY
THAT THAT THAT'S BEEN COVERED .
WE'VE COVERED THESE TWO BECAUSE
THEY REMAIN COVERED SO
INDUSTRIAL AND PICK ONE AREA OK
AND THEN I DO THINK THAT WE'VE
ALSO COVERED ONE TEN.
WOULD IT BE POSSIBLE TO ENSURE
NO STREETS CONSIST OF OUR ONE
ZONE IS IN TRANSITION THAT'S I
YEAH I THINK WE JUST CONSENSUS
ON THAT.
>> I THINK WE JUST RESOLVED AND
THEN I OBSERVED THE D TO IN
SOME CASES TRANSLATED TO
TRANSITION AND OTHERS
TRANSLATED TO HUB.
WOULD IT BE POSSIBLE TO CALL
THIS OUT ON ONE TWELVE TO
UNDERSCORE THAT ALREADY TWO HAS
NOT BEEN REASON WHY NOT.
>> WHY HASN'T IT BEEN REASON TO
HAVE WHERE IT'S GOING INTO
TRANSITION BUT WOULDN'T THE THE
HEIGHTENED WHAT'S OUR HEIGHT IN
TRANSITION TO IT'S LIKE SIXTY
IF IT'S ADJACENT TO HUB CAN
SCALE UP TO THE SAME HEIGHT HUB
AS IT'S CURRENTLY THAT'S FINE
THAT'S FINE SINCE IT'S JUST A
PARENTHETICAL TO SAY THAT NOT
ALL OF D TO ADD TO IMMEDIATELY
TO HELP MICHEL CAN I DO MY TWO
QUICK ONES.
YOU HAVE TWO ADDITIONAL ONES
ARE YES.
YES I'M SORRY I THOUGHT THAT WE
HAD TO ADDRESS THE FACT THAT WE
TOOK A FLIGHT OUT OF INDUSTRIAL
AND TRANSITION.
OH AND WE NEED TO MAKE THE SAME
CHANGE IN HUB OR SOME WE NEED
TO MAKE THEM CONSISTENT.
RIGHT BECAUSE RIGHT NOW HUB IS
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL AND TRANSITION
INDUSTRIAL.
>> THIS IS ONE OF YOUR COMMENTS
THAT'S IN HERE.
NO, IT'S JUST SOMETHING THAT WE
DIDN'T RESOLVE FROM LAST
MEETING WHEN WE TOOK THE LIGHT
OUT OF INDUSTRIAL.
WE KNEW THAT WE HAVE LIGHT
INDUSTRIAL AND HUB.
WE JUST CHANGED INDUSTRIAL
WHICH HAD CHANGED TRANSITION TO
INDUSTRIAL STRAIGHT UP SO THAT
THAT'S HARDLY CONSISTENT.
>> SO YOU'RE SAYING THAT NEEDS
TO BE CHANGED OVER THE NEXT.
YEAH, WELL I MEAN OR WE NEED TO
WE NEED TO COME UP WITH A
CONSISTENT WAY TO TALK ABOUT
THAT BECAUSE IT DOES FEEL THAT
IN OUR DOWNTOWN HUBS WE'VE GOT
AND LIGHT INDUSTRIAL EVENT OUR
MORE RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE INDUSTRIAL
BUT THERE WERE LEGAL.
>> NO YOU'RE YEAH YOU'RE EIGHT
FIVE MEETING YOU HAD A THERE
ARE SOME CAVEATS.
>> MY RECOMMENDATION WAS JUST
TO CHANGE THEM ALL TO
INDUSTRIAL TO INCLUDE LIGHT
INDUSTRIAL AND TO SHOW THAT WE
JUST SAY LIGHT AND INDUSTRIAL
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL AND
INDUSTRIAL.
>> SO WHEN YOU SAY IT LIKE THAT
I THINK INDUSTRIAL THEN TAKES
ON HEAVY INDUSTRIAL AND SO WHEN
WE JUST SAY INDUSTRIAL ACROSS
THE BOARD I THINK IT WOULD MEAN
LIGHT AND HEAVY.
>> SO COULD YOU SAY INDUSTRIAL
AND A PARENTHETICAL LIGHT AND
HEAVY METAL YOU COULD BECAUSE I
THOUGHT IT WAS A LEGAL ISSUE
BECAUSE OK YOU'RE SAYING NO,
IT'S NOT A LEGAL ISSUE.
>> IT IS A LEGAL ISSUE.
BUT I THINK THE WORD INDUSTRIAL
COVERS THAT IT'S WHAT WAS MY
UNDERSTANDING INDUSTRIAL IS THE
BROADER CONCEPT.
YEAH, THE BROADER TERMS.
SO THEN WE WE EITHER GO WE NEED
TO GO INDUSTRIAL CROSS.
THAT'S WHAT STAFF WOULD
RECOMMEND.
IF I'M NOT MISQUOTING BRETT
THEN CAN WE PUT IN THE NUISANCE
CONVERSATION THAT WE HAD SO
NOISE ODOR AND HARM WE HAD THAT
INFORMANT RIGHT NOW FOR
TRANSITION WE DO IT FOR ALL
OF THEM.
THE OTHER SUGGESTION THAT WILL
WE'VE MADE WAS INSTEAD
OF INDUSTRIAL SAFE INDUSTRIAL
USES THAT DO NOT CREATE
NUISANCES OR HAZARDS SO AND
WE'RE HAPPY TO HAVE THE LEGAL
LOOK AT THAT BECAUSE ALL
OF THIS HAS TO GO THROUGH LEGAL
ANYWAY.
SO I THINK THIS IS OUR INTENT
SORRY I HAVEN'T TURNED TO MY
LEFT RIGHT.
OUR INTENT IS I THINK BEING
COMMUNICATED BY COMMISSIONER
ADAMS AND THEN IF THE CITY'S
ATTORNEY FEELS THE LANGUAGE
NEEDS TO BE A SPECIFIC WAY TO
CONFORM WITH LAW, THEY WILL
MAKE THAT RECOMMENDATION AND
SEND BACK TO US.
>> IS EVERYONE OK WITH THAT AT
THE TABLE?
SO WHAT ARE WE DOING IN THE
MEANTIME UNTIL LEGAL REVIEW IT?
>> I MEAN I WOULD I WOULD THINK
YOU NEED TO SAY SAFE INDUSTRIAL
DOESN'T CREATE NUISANCES BUT
INDUSTRIAL HE SAID SAFE
INDUSTRIAL USES THAT DO NOT
CREATE NUISANCES OR SO MY
CONCERN HERE IS, YOU KNOW,
ALLOWING SAYING THAT WE'RE
GOING TO ALLOW STUFF BUT NOT
TELL RESIDENTIAL PEOPLE WHO
LIVE IN HOUSES THAT THEY'RE
GOING TO GET THE SMELL.
TERRY NEXT TO THEIR HOUSE.
YEAH.
I WOULD JUST SAY INDUSTRY
USES IT DO NOT CREATE HAZARDS
NUISANCES THAT WOULD BE TOTALLY
FINE ABOUT OK HERE WE HAVE THAT
ONE OK WITH THAT I SEE NOT YOU
.
ALL RIGHT WE HAVE AGREEMENT AT
THE TABLE.
WE JUST TOOK A STRAW POLL AND I
APOLOGIZE NUISANCES AND HAZARDS
BECAUSE THOSE HAVE DEFINITIONS
CORRECT?
YES.
DEFINITIONS OK, YES THEY HAVE
LEGAL DEFINITIONS.
THE FINAL ONE IS THE THE THE
WAY THAT WE DESCRIBE TO
TAPERING CHANGES FROM PAGE TO
PAGE IN SOME PLACES WE TALK
ABOUT IT TAPERING AWAY FROM
HOME AND IN OTHER PLACES WE
TALK ABOUT A TAPERING AS IT
GETS CLOSER TO RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS.
I THINK THE LATTER IS THE RIGHT
DIRECTION TOWARD RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS THAT IT CAN SCALE UP
TOWARDS BETTER.
>> WHY DON'T YOU SAY TAPER
DOWN?
THAT'D BE FINE.
THAT WOULD BE FINE BECAUSE WE
HAVE AGREEMENT YOU TAPER UP AND
TAPER DOWN.
>> YEP.
NO THEY'RE DOWN FROM WHERE WE
TAPER IS NOT IF IT BACKS TO
HOBBIT'S IF IT GETS CLOSE TO
THAT SORT OF TAPER DOWN THEN
SCALE UP.
I HAVE ABSOLUTELY YEAH.
YEAH AND THEN YOU CAN MAKE
SIMPLER BY COMBINING THEM AND
THEN YOU DON'T NEED TO
COMMISSIONER I WAS JUST GOING
TO SAY I THINK THAT THAT
ADDRESSES THE ONE THAT WE
HAVEN'T FULLY ADDRESSED WHICH
IS WHERE HUB ABUTS DIRECTLY
RESIDENTIAL AND SO THAT IDEA
THAT BOTH OF THEM MAY TAPER
GIVEN PROXIMITY TO RESIDENTIAL
RIGHT.
WHICH WE ALREADY HAVE AND ONE
IT'S SELF ADJUSTING AS IT
APPROACHES RESIDENTIAL AND I
JUST WANTED TO AGAIN RAISE THE
POINT THROUGHOUT THE MEMO OUR
DISTRICT IS USED AND I WAS
THINKING THAT WE WERE TRYING TO
CALL THE THINGS THAT ARE IN THE
PLAN CATEGORIES LAND USE
CATEGORIES AND WHEN ZONING
HAPPENS THEY BECOME ZONING
DISTRICTS TO HELP AGAIN TO HELP
ENCOURAGE THE PUBLIC TO
UNDERSTAND THAT WE AREN'T
ZONING ANYTHING RIGHT NOW,
CORRECT?
>> YES.
DISCUSSED THAT.
I THINK IN THIS CASE IT WAS
RESIDENTIAL IS THE LAND USE
CATEGORY AND THEN IF WE HAD TWO
TIERS UNDER IT THOSE WERE
DISTRICTS.
>> RIGHT.
BUT WE'RE NOT GOING TO DO THAT
YET.
SO SO THAT POINT IS TAKEN CARE
OF .
ALL RIGHT.
LET'S JUST GO BACK TO THIS ONE
LAST ONE AND THEN I THINK AS I
HAVE STRIKE FOR ALL OF THESE
EXCEPT FOR AREAS THAT HAVE HUB
DIRECTLY ADJACENT TO
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT SHOULD ALL
HUB HAVE SOME TYPE OF BUFFER
FROM RESIDENTIAL THROUGH
TRANSACTION?
NO.
>> CAN WE GET RID OF THAT
THAT'S UP TO YOU OR DO YOU WANT
TO VOTE ON THAT?
NO, LET ME JUST CHECK THE
TABLE.
ALL RIGHT.
SO YOU CAN HAVE IT.
SO YOU'RE SAYING YOU CAN HAVE A
HUB WITH THE HUB HEIGHTS RIGHT
NEXT TO TRANSITION BECAUSE I
DON'T HAVE THAT HUB HOW IT
TAPERS LIKE BECAUSE IT'S
MIMICKING TO SEE ONE.
>> YEAH, OK, AS LONG AS WE HAVE
IF WE CAN CONFIRM IN THE TEXT
HUB TAPERS THEN THAT SEEMS COOL
TO ME.
YEAH I MEAN I WOULD LOVE FOR A
HUB IN TRANSITION TO BE MERGED
BUT THAT'S JUST ME.
>> I'M JUST TRYING TO GET US TO
ONE ZONING CATEGORY ZERO.
YOU ARE AND ACTUALLY I THINK TO
BE REAL HONEST I THINK IF THERE
WERE ONE ZONE ZONING CATEGORY
IT MIGHT MAKE IT CLEARER THAT
OUR RESIDENTIAL CATEGORY DOES
NOW UNIQUELY INCLUDE
OPPORTUNITY FOR NEIGHBORHOOD
COMMERCIAL WHICH IS NOT RIGHT.
AND SO THERE WAS A PUBLIC
COMMENT EARLIER TODAY ABOUT
THAT LIKE JUST BECAUSE IT'S
RESIDENTIAL ACTUALLY IT DOES
NOT MEAN IT'S EXCLUSIVE.
NONE OF THESE ARE EXCLUSIVE
ANYMORE RIGHT.
>> WHICH WAS A COMMENT THAT
SOMEONE MADE THAT THERE'S GOING
TO BE MORE RESIDENTIAL IN
TRANSITION AND HUD BUT WE'RE
NOT CALLING THEM RESIDENTIAL.
I THINK EVEN COMMISSIONER DISH
ARTICULATED THAT AT EIGHT FIVE
SO GREAT COMMISSIONER ABRAMS
HAS TO HAVE SOMETHING ELSE.
NO, I THINK THAT WAS THE LAST
THING.
>> THAT'S IT.
I WAS JUST GOING TO GO OVER A
TIMELINE IF YOU SORRY.
JUST ONE MOMENT.
THIS MIGHT BE A CAN OF WORMS SO
WE CAN IF WE WERE RIGHT LET'S
NOT DO IT FIND IT'S BEEN
BOTHERING YOU FOR A WHILE AND I
JUST I SENT AN EMAIL NOT LONG
BEFORE THIS MEETING SO MAYBE
SOME OF YOU HAVEN'T SEEN IT BUT
I REALLY DON'T UNDERSTAND WHY
THE CITY COUNCIL DIRECTED US TO
HAVE TRIPLEX PERMITTED BY RIGHT
WHEN IN THE SAME VOLUME YOU
COULD COMPLEX.
SO I SENT A DIAGRAM TO INDICATE
WHY I SAY THAT I THINK THERE
ARE EXAMPLES OF THESE ALL OVER
TOWN.
I'D BE HAPPY TO PROVIDE THEM.
I THINK ACTUALLY THEY'VE
ALREADY BEEN INCLUDED IN SOME
OF THE MATERIALS WE'VE RECEIVED
FROM LIKE SARAH MILLS WHEN YOU
DID YOUR TOUR IF YOU JUST
COMPARE THE VOLUME OF AN
OSTENSIBLY A SINGLE FAMILY
HOUSE THAT KIND OF MAXES OUT,
IT'S A LOT YOU CAN HAVE A
STACKED TO TWO APARTMENT
STACKED THAT'S A DUPLEX IF YOU
JUST CUT THAT IN HALF YOU'VE
GOT A COMPLEX SO IT FILLS I
WOULD LIKE SOME VEAC BY WHICH
WE COULD TRY TO PUSH BACK ON
THAT LIMITATION AND HAVE
COMPLEXES PERMITTED BY RIGHT.
AND THEN JUST FOR THE SAKE
OF MY ARGUMENT I SHOWED HOW YOU
COULD TAKE A TRIPLEX THREE
STACK THREE STORIES IF YOU
SPLIT THAT IN HALF FRONT TO
BACK YOU GET A SIX SO WHY NOT
GO TO SIX FLAGS?
>> SO I THINK I WOULD LIKE TO
KNOW EITHER WHAT ARE THE
CONCERNS?
>> IS IT ABOUT TRASH CAN VOLUME
OR MARKING LIKE WHAT IS THE
CONCERN ABOUT OF CLOUD OVER A
TRIPLEX IF THE BUILDING VOLUME
OR MACING IS THE SAME BEFORE
EVERYBODY STARTS?
WELL, THAT SOUNDS LIKE A
QUESTION FOR COUNCIL MEMBER
DISH.
>> I DON'T KNOW THAT IN TWENTY
FOUR I DON'T I DON'T KNOW
BEFORE WE GET TO THAT DID YOU
RECEIVE HER PDF WOULD YOU BE
WILLING TO SHARE YOUR SCREEN
BECAUSE THE PUBLIC HASN'T SO
THAT'S OK.
YEAH I KNOW IT NEEDS TO GET TO
COURTNEY BY 4:00 P.M. ON FRIDAY
IN ORDER TO GET INCLUDED IN OUR
PACKET SO THAT THE PUBLIC CAN
SEE I MAY WELL SHE'S SHARING
THAT THIS IS EXACTLY THE THING
ABOUT THE DIAGRAM FROM
KILPATRICK THAT I WAS TALKING
ABOUT WHICH IS MORE ABOUT THE
OVERALL SIZE OF THE BUILDING
RATHER THAN HOW MANY UNITS ARE
IN IT.
>> YEAH, YEAH.
SO WHAT I WOULD LIKE TO DO
BECAUSE IT'S ELEVEN TWENTY FIVE
AND SO MY GOAL TONIGHT IS FOR
US TO FINISH BE OK WITH THAT
THAT WE CAN ALL LEAVE THIS
TABLE FEELING OK AND THEN
PLANNER THEN IT CAN RELEASE THE
SECOND DRAFT TO THE CONSULTANT
SO THAT THEY CAN RETURN A THIRD
DRAFT SO THAT WE CAN APPROVE
THAT SO THAT COUNCIL CAN REVIEW
IT AND DECIDE FOR FURTHER
ACTION IS ARE YOU OK WITH WHAT
MY AGENDA IS SO THIS CAME IN
LATE.
I DO WANT TO ASK YOU TO ALLOW
US TO DISCUSS FOR FIFTEEN
MINUTES SO TO ELEVEN THIRTY ONE
AND THEN WE'LL SORRY ELEVEN
FORTY ONE OH WHILE I WAS
CHANGING THE WAY TIME WORKED I
THINK I'M AFRAID I'M GOING TO
DO THAT BUT I'M TRYING TO SET
THE TABLE THE FLOOR TO MAKE
SURE THAT EVERYBODY IS WILLING
TO GO WITH ME HERE SO THAT'LL
BE 11 FORTY ONE AND AND THEN
THAT'S THE HEART STOP AND THEN
WE CAN DECIDE IF WE WANT TO
CONTINUE TO DISCUSS THIS AND IF
WE DO WE'LL HAVE TO TAKE IT UP
IN ANOTHER MEETING NEXT WEEK OR
WE CAN WAIT UNTIL THE THIRD
DRAFT AND THEN ADD IN THE THIRD
DRAFT.
IS THERE ANY OBJECTION AT THE
TABLE?
YES, THIS IS WHAT FOR THE THIRD
DRAFT WHAT OK WHAT EDIT WHAT
LEVEL OF EDIT WHAT WHAT LEVEL
OF EDIT ARE WE PRESUMING WE CAN
MAKE WITH EACH DRAFT IDEALLY
THERE ARE FEWER AND FEWER EDITS
AS WE HAVE SPENT SEVERAL HOURS
DISCUSSING THE CONTENT.
RIGHT SO I MEAN YOU WANT A
NUMBER OF MEETINGS OR A NUMBER
OF HOURS OR WOULD YOU I'M JUST
THINKING LIKE SHOULD WE SAY OK
,WE'RE GOING TO GIVE THIS TO
THE CONSULTANTS AND THEN WE CAN
MAKE FURTHER CHANGES IN THE
THIRD ROUND WHAT COMMISSIONER
ABRAN SENT IN OR ARE WE SAYING
WE SHOULD FINISH TALKING ABOUT
THAT THE THIRD DRAFT WE'RE NOT
REALLY GOING TO MAKE
SUBSTANTIVE CHANGES WE'RE GOING
TO MAKE YEAH.
>> SO THIS COULD THIS
DISCUSSION COULD REVEAL THAT
IT'S A SUBSTANTIVE CHANGE AND
AND WE WOULD SAY WE NEED MORE
TIME TO PROCESS IT BUT I MEAN
EVERY DRAFT WE CAN MAKE,
WHATEVER CHANGES WE WANT, IT'S
JUST TIME AT THAT POINT COUNCIL
APPROVED ANOTHER EIGHTY THREE
THOUSAND DOLLARS BUT FOR THE
LARGE EDIT YEAH.
>> SO PLANNER WILL TELL US YOU
HAVE RUN OUT OF MONEY TO MAKE
BIG SUBSTANTIAL CHANGES.
WELL I THINK THAT'S WHAT I'M
ASKING.
THAT'S WHAT I WANT TO MAKE
SURE.
SO HAVE WE RUN OUT OF MONEY.
WE NEED TO FINISH THIS NOW UM
THE MAJORITY OF THE MONEY THAT
WAS JUST APPROVED FOR US IS FOR
THIS EDIT OK, I CAN'T TELL YOU
UNTIL THEY'VE STARTED WORKING
ON IT HOW FAR INTO IT THEY GET
.
I CAN IF YOU LIKE STAY IN
CONTACT WITH THEM ABOUT YOU
KNOW ARE YOU 80 PERCENT OR 90
PERCENT OF THE WAY DONE IN THIS
LAST 10 PERCENT?
>> WE WANT TO THROW THIS YOUR
WAY.
>> I SUPPOSE THAT CAN BE DONE.
I GUESS I'M CURIOUS WITH
COUNCIL'S RESOLUTION.
>> YEAH.
HOW HOW YOU WOULD YOU WOULD
LIKE TO GO FORWARD POTENTIALLY
WITH WITH WITH SUGGESTING THIS?
>> WE'RE NOT SURE YET.
I MEAN WE WE'RE GOING TO MAKE A
MOTION AND HAVE THIS
CONVERSATION BUT IT SOUNDS LIKE
THEIR VERSION THREE SHOULD HAVE
MINOR EDITS NOT SUBSTANTIVE
ONES.
>> IT'S HOW I WOULD ANSWER
RIGHT.
SO I THINK EVERYONE IS OK WITH
MY PROPOSAL.
SO COMMISSIONER ABRAM'S WON'T
YOU KICK US OFF AND THEN WE'LL
SEE WHERE WE ARE IN FIFTEEN
MINUTES.
MICHELLE, DO YOU MIND JUST
QUICKLY PAGING THROUGH JUST SO
THE PUBLIC THE THREE OF YOU CAN
SEE WHAT IT IS THAT I SENT IN
SO I JUST SENT A SERIES
OF DIAGRAMS.
THE FIRST ONE IS A SINGLE
FAMILY HOME MAXING OUT A KIND
OF TYPICAL LOT IN ANN ARBOR.
IF YOU COULD IMAGINE THERE IS
THERE'S A LOT OF DISCREPANCY
BUT AND THEN IF YOU GO TO THE
NEXT ONE SO THERE IS JUST A
DUPLEX, RIGHT?
YOU'VE AN APARTMENT ON THE
BOTTOM AND AN THE TOP DUPLEXES
COME IN MANY FORMS BUT THIS IS
A TRIPLEX I IMAGINE CITY
COUNCIL WAS THINKING OF IT SO
WITH A THREE STOREY LIMIT I
IMAGINE THEY SAID TRIPLEX
BECAUSE YOU GET AN APARTMENT
ONE ON EACH FLOOR THREE FLOORS.
BUT IF YOU GO TO THE NEXT SLIDE
YOU CAN JUST SEE IF YOU TAKE A
DUPLEX AND JUST CUT IN HALF YOU
CAN GET FOUR APARTMENTS PRETTY
EASILY.
AND IF YOU GO TO THE NEXT ONE,
IF YOU TAKE A TRIPLEX AND I
DON'T KNOW IF YOU CAN GET A SIX
PLEX.
SO MY MOTION I WOULD LIKE TO
MAKE IS THAT WE'RE EVERYWHERE
WE SAY DUPLEXES AND TRY BOXES
ARE PERMITTED BY RIGHT.
AND WE GO ON RIGHT ALWAYS TO
SAY ADDITIONAL BUILDING TYPES
ALLOWED ARE CONSISTENT WITH
NEIGHBORHOOD FORM AND SCALE
THAT WE REVISE TO SAY DUPLEXES
TRIPLE XS AND QUAD FLEXES ARE
PERMITTED.
>> RIGHT.
ALL RIGHT.
SO WE CAN DO THIS VERY QUICKLY
IF THERE'S ANY LIKE DISCUSSION
THAT WANTS TO HAPPEN.
UH, LET'S GO FOR THAT AND THEN
WE'LL TAKE A STRAW POLL.
>> I'M A NO VOTE.
I JUST I DON'T THINK THE I
THINK THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN
THE TWO IS ARTIFICIAL FOR ALL
THE REASONS YOU POINT OUT.
BUT I JUST THINK IT'S POLITICS
AND WE GOT THE DIRECTION WE GOT
AND I WANT TO MINIMIZE THE
POLITICAL DIFFICULTY OF GETTING
OVER THE GOAL LINE AND EXECUTE
IT.
BUT EVERYTHING YOU'VE SAID
MAKES SENSE AND IT'S STILL THE
CASE THAT WE'RE ALLOWING LEXY'S
AS A PRIMARY USE BUT COULD HAVE
LARGER UNITS GIVEN CONTEXT.
SO IF IT'S EASIER TO SHOW THAT
IN THIS PARTICULAR PLACE YOU
COULD DO A SIX PLEX ON WHAT A
TRIPLEX WOULD WORK THE LANGUAGE
IS NOT PRECLUDING.
>> THAT FELT SIGNIFICANT TO ME
THAT WE'RE SAYING THIS IS
WHAT'S PERMITTED BY RIGHT.
>> THERE'S NO UNCERTAINTY EVERY
SINGLE ON THE CITY AS A YOU
KNOW THAT THAT'S PERMITTED BY
RIGHT.
SO I DON'T UNDERSTAND THE LOGIC
OF LIMITING IT TO THREE IN THE
LOGIC OF LIMITING TO UNITS BUT
WE'VE ALREADY AGREED WE'RE
GOING TO DO THAT.
>> BUT NO WE HAVEN'T AGREED TO
YEAH.
WELL IT'S IT'S ALL THROUGH HERE
.
IT'S JUST I DON'T MEAN TO
CORRECT YOU SO THE THERE ISN'T
A UNIT BUT A DUPLEX AS A UNIT
IT'S YES I UNDERSTAND YOU KNOW
I'M SORRY I WITHDRAW SO I HEAR
WHAT YOU'RE SAYING BUT I THINK
IT'S MEANINGFULLY DIFFERENT TO
ME TO SAY THAT COMPLEXES ARE
PERMITTED BY RIGHT.
THAT YOU DON'T HAVE TO WORRY
ABOUT NEIGHBORHOOD YOU KNOW,
CONTEXT BECAUSE IT FITS WITHIN
THE SAME BUILDING MASS AS A
DUPLEX.
YEAH.
SORRY GO WELL THEY CAN AND I
WOULD SAY SIX ONE BEDROOM UNITS
MAYBE LESS SQUARE FOOTAGE THEN
THREE SIX BEDROOM UNITS.
>> RIGHT BUT AND THAT'S EXACTLY
WHY I TOOK ALL THE PICTURES AND
DID THE RESEARCH.
I'M LIKE WHAT SIZE WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT AND SO I AM WITH
YOU AND I DON'T BECAUSE WE HAVE
SOME DIRECTION I FEEL LIKE IT
IS WHAT IT IS AND I MEAN UNLESS
UNLESS THERE'S A SENSE THAT
COUNCIL IS WILLING TO THINK TO
LOOK AT THIS, I, I I DON'T SEE
CHANGING THAT BUT I'M ACTUALLY
COUNTING MY BEDROOM OR COUNTING
MY SQUARE FOOTAGE JUST YOUR
SQUARE FOOTAGE AND AS ACTUALLY
IT WAS ONE OF THE QUESTIONS
THAT I WOULD HAVE BACK TO YOU
IS LIKE IF YOU COULD PUT WHAT
THESE ARE IN I COULD DO THE
MATH TO BUT LIKE WHAT THEY ARE
IN SQUARE FOOTAGE.
I THINK THAT THAT WOULD HELP
DRIVE HOME LIKE THAT MAYBE DO.
>> YEAH, I UNDERSTAND AND I
UNDERSTAND MAYBE
COUNTERMOVEMENT YOU CAN CORRECT
ME BUT THE WAY YOU PLAY THE OUT
IS TOTALLY LOGICAL.
WHY WOULD THE SIX BUCKS BE ANY
DIFFERENT THAN A SINGLE FAMILY
HOUSE BUT DO YOU THINK IN A IN
A GENERAL UNDERSTANDING THE
MORE THE UNITS THE BIGGER THE
SIZE OF THE STRUCTURE AND THE
COUNCIL WAS GIVING US
INSTRUCTION.
WE WANT TO TRY AS A PRIMARY
USE.
WE RECOGNIZE SOME SOME LIMIT ON
WHAT SHOULD BE ALLOWED IS A
PRIMARY USE BECAUSE OF THE
CONCERNS ABOUT THE SIZE OF THE
STRUCTURE GOING.
SO YES, THE WAY YOU'RE
PRESENTING IT IS TOTALLY
LOGICAL BUT IT'S NOT THE WAY
THAT PEOPLE THINK ABOUT IT WHEN
THEY'RE HEARING WHAT THE
CHANGES ARE THAT ARE BEING MADE
AND SO I'M NOT TROUBLED BY THAT
BECAUSE WE'RE ALSO INCLUDING A
LANGUAGE THAT YOU CAN INCLUDE
MORE IF THE CONTEXT JUST MEANS
YOU HAVE TO SHOW THAT THERE'S A
GOOD CONTEXT FOR THIS AND IT'LL
FIT.
>> SO I'M MORE INCLINED TO GO
WITH COMMISSIONER ADAMS ON THIS
.
I THINK THERE WAS A LOGIC
BEHIND THE WAY THIS GUIDANCE
WAS STRUCTURED.
I THINK IT'S FINE GIVEN THE
CAVEAT THAT YOU CAN ALWAYS DO
MORE IF THE CONTEXT ALLOWS IT
BUT IT WILL ADD CONTEXTUALIZING
THE LOGIC OF IT WILL BE ALLOWED
OR IT WON'T BE ALLOWED.
I MEAN BECAUSE I MEAN I I I
AGREE WITH BOTH SIDES.
I THINK THERE IS A POLITICAL
REASON.
I DON'T THINK THAT POLITICAL
REASON IS COUCHED
IN ANY SORT
OF RATIONALE.
I THINK IT'S JUST A POLITICAL
REASON.
I THINK IT'S A IT'S A THOUGHTS
AND FEELINGS KIND OF THING
OF WHAT PEOPLE LIKE OR DON'T
LIKE.
I HAVEN'T SEEN ANY NUMBERS
OF TRIPLETTE CASES.
I DON'T KNOW OF THAT MANY
TRIFECTAS CERTAINLY IN MY
NEIGHBORHOOD IT'S ALL QUAD'S IF
IT'S IF THERE ARE MULTIPLE
BUILDING TYPES AND THERE ARE I
MEAN I LOOK OUT MY FRONT WINDOW
AND THERE ARE TWO, THREE, THREE
HOUSES IN A GARAGE AND NOW
THAT'S TWO COMPLEXES IN A
SINGLE FAMILY HOUSE.
I DON'T YOU KNOW WHETHER IT'S A
TRIPLEX OR A CLOSET, I THINK
PROBABLY THE STORIES IS KIND
OF WHERE PEOPLE FELT LIKE OH WE
CAN HAVE THREE DECKER OR
WHATEVER BUT I JUST THINK
POLITICALLY I MEAN IF WE COULD
SOMEHOW FORWARD IT TO COUNCIL
AND SAY WHY DID YOU SAY TRIPLE
EXES?
BUT YOU KNOW, BECAUSE IF
THERE'S NO LIKE WHAT'S THE
RATIONALE FOR THIS BECAUSE I
DON'T UNDERSTAND THE RATIONALE
BUT I DON'T THINK IT'S BASED IN
A RATIONALE.
I THINK IT'S BASED ON A FEELING
OR A POLITICAL REALITY OF LIKE
YOU DIDN'T WANT A LOT.
>> SO WE'RE GIVING YOU NOT A
LOT AND I DON'T KNOW HOW WE I
DON'T KNOW HOW WE PUSH BACK
AGAINST THAT BECAUSE IT'S IT IT
IS THE IF IT COMES BACK TO US
THAT IS EVEN MORE PROBLEMATIC.
>> SO YEAH.
I MEAN I HEAR THE CONCERN ABOUT
THE POLITICAL DIMENSION.
I GUESS MY WHAT I'M ASKING I
GUESS IS IS THAT TRUE?
LIKE THE TRIPLEX IS REALLY THE
THING THAT EVERYBODY HANG THEIR
HAT ON OR IT FELT TO ME LIKE A
KIND OF ARBITRARY THING THAT
JUST GOT PULLED OUT OF THIS GUY
BECAUSE OF A THREE STORY HIGH
LIMIT AND THAT MAYBE COMPLEX
WOULD HAVE BEEN JUST AS
POLITICALLY SO MAYBE I'M
LOOKING TO YOU CAN'T REMEMBER
OR IF THERE'S A MECHANISM BY
WHICH I CAN ASK FOR FEEDBACK
FROM COUNSEL ON THIS THEN I
WOULD I WOULD PURSUE THAT.
>> BUT IT FEELS IT FEELS SO
ARBITRARY TO ME SO IF I COULD
PROFFER A COMMA IN I WOULD SAY
THAT I THINK I ASKED THE FIFTH
WHICH WAS I MEAN IS IT COUNCIL
IS NOT A PROFESSOR
OF ARCHITECTURE.
IT'S NOT AN ARCHITECT.
RIGHT.
AND NOR SHOULD THEY NECESSARILY
BE I THINK THIS IS COUCHED IN
LOGIC.
SO I THINK THERE IS AN ELEMENT
OF SHOULD WE ACTUALLY TRY TO
GET SOME FEEDBACK ON THIS
AGAIN?
AND ALSO TO ME ACTUALLY IT'S
MORE ABOUT THE BAD CULTURE AS
WE TALKED ABOUT THREE UNITS
OF TEN BEDS OR YOU KNOW, SIX
BEDS IS YEAH.
YEAH.
VASTLY DIFFERENT PROPOSITION
THAN THREE SINGLE YOU KNOW,
SINGLES OR EVEN SIX SINGLE
APARTMENTS.
SO I WOULD I WOULD SAY THAT
THERE'S A RATIONALE TO ME TO
LISTEN TO THE EXPERTIZE THAT'S
BEING PRESENTED HERE AND SEE IF
THERE'S LOGIC BEHIND IT ITSELF
ANYWAYS THAT'S THAT'S MY TWO
CENTS.
I DON'T KNOW IF THERE'S A
MECHANISM BY WHICH COUNCIL CAN
GIVE US FEEDBACK AFTER SEEING
THIS.
I'M SORRY.
I'M I'M TALKING ABOUT MY
COUNCIL BUT BUT BUT AND I'M NOT
NECESSARILY TAKING THEIR SIDE
BUT THAT WAS THE LOGIC OF NOT
LIMITING.
WE HAD LOGIC BEHIND NOT
LIMITING BY UNITS WE HAVE WE WE
TALKED ABOUT ALL THIS BEFORE WE
SAID WE SHOULD REGULATE BY
ENVELOPE AND SCALE AND IT
SHOULDN'T BE BY UNIT AND ALL
THAT MADE SENSE AND IT WAS
EXPLAINED AND WE GOT OVERRULED
AND WE GOT OVERRULED FOR A SET
OF POLITICAL REASONS THAT I
THINK ARE SOMEWHAT EXPLAINED TO
US BUT MOSTLY NOT I'M NOT I
WOULD HATE TO SEND THIS I WOULD
HATE TO FINISH THE WORK AND
SEND IT AND GET GET IT SENT
BACK AND HAVE THIS THAT WOULD
BE A THAT'S POTENTIALLY LIKE A
ONE TO THREE MONTH KIND
OF DELAY AND IT WOULD BE
ADDITIONAL COST AND IT WOULD
YOU KNOW THAT DOESN'T FEEL LIKE
A RISK WORTH RUNNING.
I ALSO READ NO ACCESSORS
COMMENT ON OUR DOCKET TODAY
WHERE HE SAID IF YOUR
PERMISSIVE ABOUT IF YOU TRULY
HAVE THE THE POLITICAL WILL TO
MAKE TRY POXES PERMISSIVE
PERMISSIVELY ALLOWED THAT'S A
HUGE VICTORY AND IS MASSIVE AND
YOU KNOW IN MY MIND SORT OF A B
PLUS RESULT.
>> I MEAN I THINK YOU'RE
GETTING IT TO QUAD'S WOULD BE
BETTER BUT I'M SORT OF CONTENT
TO FIGHT FOR WHAT I'VE GOT.
>> SO I I DO WANT TO UNDERSCORE
THAT I'VE BEEN DOING RESEARCH
AND I HAVE A LITTLE SPREADSHEET
THAT I'M BUILDING OF WAYS THAT
CITIES UNDERCUT WHAT THEY SAID
WAS ALLOWED AND EVERY CITY HAS
HAD A WAY OF UNDERCUTTING WHAT
THEY SAID WAS ALLOWED AND WHAT
COUNCIL HAS DONE IS CHOSEN A
THING THAT WE THINK WE CAN SAY
EVERYWHERE NO EXCEPTION THIS
THING IS ALLOWED AND EVERY
OTHER CITY HAS SAID WELL EXCEPT
FOR HERE WE'RE EXCEPT FOR THERE
AND AND AND WE ALSO PUT IN THE
LANGUAGE OF WE EXPECT TO SEE
REFORM OF BUILDING FORM AND I
FORGET THE I FORGET THE TERM
FOR IT.
YEAH.
ALL OF THAT WE EXPECT TO SEE
CHANGES OF THOSE TO MAKE SURE
THAT THIS WILL WORK, YOU KNOW,
SO WE'RE NOT RESTRICTING THE
ENVELOPE AND WE KNOW SO WE HAVE
SAID EXPLICITLY THAT THAT WE
LOOK FOR THAT IN THE ZONING
THAT WE WILL WE EXPECT THAT TO
HAPPEN.
>> THE ZONING WE DON'T KNOW WHO
WE IS GOING TO BE THEN.
>> SO THERE IS THAT IS A BIG
QUESTION.
RIGHT.
BUT I THINK THAT THAT IS NOT TO
BE THAT'S NOT A I THINK IT'S
IT'S A GOOD B PLUS LIKE A YOU
KNOW, B PLUS OR MINUS AND
COUNCIL UNDERSTAND EXACTLY THIS
THIS WILL NOT BE NEWS TO THEM.
THEY THEY KNOW I I HAVE TALKED
TO THEM MANY OF THEM ANYWAY
ABOUT WHY WE DON'T REGULATE WHY
WE DON'T LIMIT OUR UNITS HOW
HOW MUCH THAT'S ACTUALLY
CONTRARY TO WHAT PEOPLE ARE
CONCERNED ABOUT BECAUSE IT
MEANS YOU'RE YOU COULD GET MORE
BEDROOMS BECAUSE YOU LIMITED
UNITS BUT THIS THIS PLANNING
COMMISSION HAD SAID THAT AND
HOW THEY GOT TRANSLATED IN THE
PUBLIC DISCOURSE WAS UNLIMITED
UNITS.
THEY'RE ALLOWING UNLIMITED
DO YOU NOT REMEMBER WHEN WE HAD
UNITS.
PEOPLE COMING TO SPEAK AT
DO YOU NOT REMEMBER WHEN WE HAD
PLANNING COMMISSION AND THEY
PEOPLE COMING TO SPEAK AT
WOULD TALK ABOUT HOW WE WERE
PLANNING COMMISSION AND THEY
ALLOWING UNLIMITED UNITS AND SO
WOULD TALK ABOUT HOW WE WERE
THAT'S HOW THAT GOT TRANSLATED.
ALLOWING UNLIMITED UNITS AND SO
IT'S NOT COUNCIL THAT DOESN'T
THAT'S HOW THAT GOT TRANSLATED.
UNDERSTAND.
IT'S NOT COUNCIL THAT DOESN'T
IT'S COUNCIL THAT DOESN'T HAVE
UNDERSTAND.
A PLATFORM FROM WHICH TO OFFER
IT'S COUNCIL THAT DOESN'T HAVE
A SEMINAR IN SMART DESIGN.
A PLATFORM FROM WHICH TO OFFER
WE CAN'T TEACH WE CAN TEACH A
A SEMINAR IN SMART DESIGN.
LITTLE BUT WE HAVE TO LISTEN.
WE CAN'T TEACH WE CAN TEACH A
WE HAVE TO HEAR WHAT PEOPLE ARE
LITTLE BUT WE HAVE TO LISTEN.
NOT READY FOR AND WE HAVE TO
WE HAVE TO HEAR WHAT PEOPLE ARE
KNOW THAT THIS PLAN GETS
NOT READY FOR AND WE HAVE TO
REVIEWED IN FIVE YEARS AND WHEN
KNOW THAT THIS PLAN GETS
PEOPLE REALIZE THAT OH MY GOD,
REVIEWED IN FIVE YEARS AND WHEN
NOTHING'S CHANGED, MAYBE THERE
PEOPLE REALIZE THAT OH MY GOD,
WILL BE TOTALLY RIGHT TO SAY OH
NOTHING'S CHANGED, MAYBE THERE
QUAD'S ARE FINE.
WILL BE TOTALLY RIGHT TO SAY OH
DO YOU WRITE I MEAN IT'S WE'RE
QUAD'S ARE FINE.
TRYING NOT TO GET IT'S REALLY
DO YOU WRITE I MEAN IT'S WE'RE
LIKE REPRESENTING PEOPLE MEANS
TRYING NOT TO GET IT'S REALLY
LEADING THEM BUT NOT GETTING SO
LIKE REPRESENTING PEOPLE MEANS
FAR AHEAD OF THEM AND AND IT'S
LEADING THEM BUT NOT GETTING SO
I'M STRUGGLING I'M UP A LOT
FAR AHEAD OF THEM AND AND IT'S
THINKING ABOUT WHAT IT MEANS TO
I'M STRUGGLING I'M UP A LOT
BE A REPRESENTATIVE THESE DAYS
THINKING ABOUT WHAT IT MEANS TO
BUT SO IT ISN'T ABOUT NOT
BE A REPRESENTATIVE THESE DAYS
UNDERSTANDING ON THE COUNCIL.
BUT SO IT ISN'T ABOUT NOT
>> NO I UNDERSTAND.
UNDERSTANDING ON THE COUNCIL.
I UNDERSTAND AND AGREE WITH
>> NO I UNDERSTAND.
EVERYTHING EVERYONE IS SAYING.
I UNDERSTAND AND AGREE WITH
I'M JUST I JUST I DON'T BELIEVE
EVERYTHING EVERYONE IS SAYING.
THAT THE THRESHOLD IS THERE.
I'M JUST I JUST I DON'T BELIEVE
I DON'T I DON'T KNOW WHAT THAT
THAT THE THRESHOLD IS THERE.
IS.
I DON'T I DON'T KNOW WHAT THAT
IT FEELS VERY MURKY TO ME.
IS.
IT DOESN'T FEEL ROOTED.
IT FEELS VERY MURKY TO ME.
I KNOW THERE WAS A SURVEY BUT
IT DOESN'T FEEL ROOTED.
IT'S LIKE ANYWAY I CAN LET IT
I KNOW THERE WAS A SURVEY BUT
GO.
IT'S LIKE ANYWAY I CAN LET IT
>> I WANT TO BRING IT UP.
GO.
ALL RIGHT.
>> I WANT TO BRING IT UP.
YOU DID MAKE A MOTION SORT
ALL RIGHT.
OF LIKE A STRAW ON MY MOTION.
YOU DID MAKE A MOTION SORT
ARE YOU SURE IT WAS NEVER
OF LIKE A STRAW ON MY MOTION.
SECONDED AND CLEARLY IT'S NOT
ARE YOU SURE IT WAS NEVER
GOING TO PASS?
SECONDED AND CLEARLY IT'S NOT
>> WELL, I MEAN FOUR STRAW
GOING TO PASS?
POLLS WE HAVEN'T TAKEN A SECOND
>> WELL, I MEAN FOUR STRAW
WE'VE JUST ACTUALLY VOTED AND
POLLS WE HAVEN'T TAKEN A SECOND
THEN GET ON WITH THE MAJORITY.
WE'VE JUST ACTUALLY VOTED AND
>> WE'LL DO WHATEVER YOU WANT
THEN GET ON WITH THE MAJORITY.
ME TO DO AT THIS.
>> WE'LL DO WHATEVER YOU WANT
>> I AM AT YOUR DISPOSAL.
ME TO DO AT THIS.
I WILL WITHDRAW MY MOTION.
>> I AM AT YOUR DISPOSAL.
OK, ALL RIGHT.
I WILL WITHDRAW MY MOTION.
IS EVERYONE FEELING OK?
OK, ALL RIGHT.
MICHELLE, DID YOU GET
IS EVERYONE FEELING OK?
EVERYTHING OR EXCUSE ME SENIOR
MICHELLE, DID YOU GET
PLANNER BENNETT DID YOU GET
EVERYTHING OR EXCUSE ME SENIOR
EVERYTHING FROM US THAT YOU
PLANNER BENNETT DID YOU GET
NEED TONIGHT TO DELIVER THE
EVERYTHING FROM US THAT YOU
SECOND DRAFT TO THE CONSULTANT?
NEED TONIGHT TO DELIVER THE
>> I BELIEVE SO.
SECOND DRAFT TO THE CONSULTANT?
EXCELLENT.
>> I BELIEVE SO.
>> IS EVERYBODY OK WITH WHAT
EXCELLENT.
WE'VE ACCOMPLISHED?
>> IS EVERYBODY OK WITH WHAT
>> I'M JUST CHECKING ONE MORE
WE'VE ACCOMPLISHED?
TIME.
>> I'M JUST CHECKING ONE MORE
GREAT.
TIME.
>> IT IS MY DETERMINATION THAT
GREAT.
WE DO NOT NEED ANOTHER MEETING
>> IT IS MY DETERMINATION THAT
NEXT WEEK SO OR SO YOU CAN
WE DO NOT NEED ANOTHER MEETING
CONTINUE ON ITS SCHEDULE.
NEXT WEEK SO OR SO YOU CAN
>> YES YOU DO.
CONTINUE ON ITS SCHEDULE.
OK, I DON'T KNOW WHAT'S ON THE
>> YES YOU DO.
AGENDA BUT IT'S ON THE CALENDAR
OK, I DON'T KNOW WHAT'S ON THE
THAT YOU HAVE A MEETING NEXT
AGENDA BUT IT'S ON THE CALENDAR
WEEK.
THAT YOU HAVE A MEETING NEXT
>> ALL RIGHT.
WEEK.
THAT BRINGS US TO ITEM NUMBER
>> ALL RIGHT.
TWELVE IS IF EVERYBODY'S OK.
THAT BRINGS US TO ITEM NUMBER
>> ALL RIGHT.
TWELVE IS IF EVERYBODY'S OK.
PUBLIC COMMENT.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THIS IS THE SECOND OPPORTUNITY
PUBLIC COMMENT.
FOR PUBLIC COMMENT EXCUSE ME.
THIS IS THE SECOND OPPORTUNITY
>> THIS IS A SECOND OPPORTUNITY
FOR PUBLIC COMMENT EXCUSE ME.
FOR INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK UP TO
>> THIS IS A SECOND OPPORTUNITY
THREE MINUTES ON ANY ISSUE
FOR INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK UP TO
WE'LL FIRST HEAR FROM THOSE
THREE MINUTES ON ANY ISSUE
PRESENT THEN REMOTE
WE'LL FIRST HEAR FROM THOSE
PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK REMOTELY
PRESENT THEN REMOTE
PRESS STAR NINE IF ON PHONE OR
PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK REMOTELY
USE THE RIGHT HAND HAND FEATURE
PRESS STAR NINE IF ON PHONE OR
IN ZOOM FOR PHONE ACCESS CALL
USE THE RIGHT HAND HAND FEATURE
EIGHT SEVEN SEVEN EIGHT FIVE
IN ZOOM FOR PHONE ACCESS CALL
THREE FIVE TO FOUR SEVEN AND
EIGHT SEVEN SEVEN EIGHT FIVE
INTERMEETING ID NINE SEVEN
THREE FIVE TO FOUR SEVEN AND
SEVEN SIX SIX THREE FOUR ONE
INTERMEETING ID NINE SEVEN
TWO TWO SIX.
SEVEN SIX SIX THREE FOUR ONE
>> CITY STAFF WILL IDENTIFY
TWO TWO SIX.
CALLERS BY THE LAST THREE
>> CITY STAFF WILL IDENTIFY
DIGITS OF THEIR PHONE NUMBER OR
CALLERS BY THE LAST THREE
BY NAME.
DIGITS OF THEIR PHONE NUMBER OR
IF ON ZOOM YOU WILL HEAR AN
BY NAME.
ANNOUNCEMENT WHEN IT'S YOUR
IF ON ZOOM YOU WILL HEAR AN
TURN TO SPEAK PLEASE LOCATE
ANNOUNCEMENT WHEN IT'S YOUR
YOURSELF IN A QUIET AREA AND
TURN TO SPEAK PLEASE LOCATE
MUTE ANY BACKGROUND NOISE FOR
YOURSELF IN A QUIET AREA AND
ALL PARTICIPANTS.
MUTE ANY BACKGROUND NOISE FOR
PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME AND
ALL PARTICIPANTS.
ADDRESS BEFORE YOUR COMMENTS.
PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME AND
IS THERE ANYONE PRESENT IN THE
ADDRESS BEFORE YOUR COMMENTS.
CHAMBER WHO WOULD LIKE TO
IS THERE ANYONE PRESENT IN THE
ADDRESS THE PLANNING COMMISSION
EARN THE RIGHT COMMISSION
REQUEST ALL THIRTY FIVE IF I
TRY TO PLACE THANKS.
THANKS FOR WORKING THROUGH
THIS.
I THINK YOU'RE PRETTY
GOOD
RESULT.
I JUST WANTED TO ADDRESS THE
THE TOPIC OF RETAIL AT GUESSING
THAT WHEN ZONING COMES AROUND
THE KINDS AND SIZES OF RETAIL
THAT ARE GOING TO BE ALLOWED IN
ANY KIND OF CATEGORY THAT'S
CALLED RESIDENTIAL VERSUS
TRANSITION IT'S GOING TO BE
DIFFERENT OF A DIFFERENT SCALE.
I'M GUESSING THE THE LARGER AND
WE'LL HAVE DAY TO DAY UTILITY.
THE OTHER ONE WILL BE MORE
OF AN AMENITY IF IT'S IN
NEIGHBORHOODS.
I THINK THAT NEIGHBORHOOD
RETAIL IS GOING TO BE THAT'S
TOUGH TO PULL OFF.
SO IN THIS ENVIRONMENT ANY
ENVIRONMENT.
SO I WOULD JUST CAUTION THAT
DIFFERENTIATION WHEN YOU'RE
TALKING ABOUT RESIDENTIAL OR
TRANSITION THE OTHER IS THE
NOTION OF PRESERVING LOW SCALE
APARTMENTS NOW THAT ARE ON YOUR
AFFORDABLE SIDE UNLESS THE CITY
BUYS THOSE THOSE ARE GOING TO
GET RENOVATED OR REDEVELOPED AT
SOME POINT AND TO SORT OF DOOM
THEM TO LOW DENSITY AND I THINK
WOULD BE A BIG MISTAKE.
SO I JUST JUST ASK YOU TO
EXERCISE SOME CAUTION IN GOING
ALONG THAT PHILOSOPHY OF TRYING
TO PRESERVE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
BY BASICALLY KEEPING IT
CONSTRAINED OR DOWN SO THANK
YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
HIGH ACHIEVING TWO EIGHT SEVEN
ZERO OPL DRIVE.
IT'S GOING TO BE REALLY QUICK.
I JUST WANT TO THINK THINK
THANK YOU ALL OF YOU FOR GOING
THROUGH THIS WHOLE PROCESS AND
I'M HAPPY THAT WE HAVE THIS TO
COMPLETE AND I I THINK TODAY
WENT SO EFFICIENTLY BECAUSE
YOU'RE JUST DRIVING AND AND I
YOU KNOW, AS A MODERATE AND
ALSO AND SO I THINK I HOPE THAT
YOU MOVE WITH THAT KIND
OF EFFICIENCY AS WE GO INTO
THEORY AND ZONING.
>> SO THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
PLANNER THAT YEAR ARE YOU
RUNNING ZOM GREAT.
>> I AM CLOSING THE PUBLIC
COMMENT.
IS THERE ANY COMMISSION
PROPOSED BUSINESS THERE?
>> WELL I AM REOPENING A PUBLIC
COMMENT
ON A LITTLE BIT ABOUT
STOLLBERG AGAIN.
WELL I DID ASK YOU TO BE
CREATIVE AND YOU ARE SO I DO
APPRECIATE THAT CONVERSATION
WITH REGARD TO THE A.P. REQUEST
,I WOULD LIKE TO CHALLENGE
YOUR CREATIVITY YET AGAIN AND
SEE IF YOU CAN COME UP WITH ANY
THOUGHTS ON YOUR OWN OR MY
SMALL GROUPS.
>> ARE YOU NOT NOT A QUORUM
OF OPEN MEETINGS ACT INAUDIBLE
CREATIVE IDEAS HOW WE CAN MAKE
SOMETHING LIKE THAT MOVE
FORWARD?
AS YOU KNOW, IT'S MY PERSONAL
OPINION THAT THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN THAT WE JUST WRAPPED UP
HERE DOES NOT SUPPORT
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND WE
REALLY NEED TO SUPPORT
AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
AND HOWEVER WE DO HAVE AN
AFFORDABLE HOUSING CRISIS.
>> WE HAVE AN ATTAINABLE PRICED
HOUSING CRISIS AS WELL.
>> OWNERSHIP AT REASONABLE
PRICE POINTS IS FAIRLY
NONEXISTENT.
SO HOW DO WE GET THERE?
AND IF YOU CAN COME UP WITH
SOMETHING BRILLIANT TO SUGGEST
HELOC AS AN ALTERNATIVE TO COME
BACK FOR SOMETHING DIFFERENT,
PLEASE PUT YOUR THINKING CAPS
ON.
>> APPRECIATE IT.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU MR STALBERG.
I AM CLOSING THE PUBLIC
HEARING.
>> IS THERE ANY COMMUNITY
COMMISSION PROPOSED BUSINESS
SEEING DONE?
>> I WILL ENTERTAIN A MOTION TO
ADJOURN FROM COMMISSIONER M.
SECONDED BY COMMISSIONER BE ALL
THOSE IN FAVOR SAY ANY OPPOSE
WE ARE ADJOURNED.
>> GOOD JOB EVERYONE